--- Page 1 ---
Finland

‘The European Union (BU) VAT Directive (2006/112/FC) is implemented in Finland through the Value Added
Tax Law, in Finnish “Arvonlisdverolaki” (30.12.1993/1501, hereafter referred to as the “VAT Law”). In
Finland, VAT is referred to as “Arvonliscivero” or “ALV”. Before the current VAT system was implemented,
Finland applied a system called turnover tax (sales tax) which was replaced by the VAT system in 1994 due to
Finland’s EU membership.

1. Taxable persons

1.1 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for domestic taxable persons

Until 31 December 2024, the VAT registration threshold was EUR 15,000. The supplier of goods and/or
services is not considered to be liable for VAT if its turnover during a calendar year does not amount to more
than EUR 15,000, unless they have been registered as a person liable to VAT at their own request. When

this threshold for VAT liability is exceeded, the supplier receives a relief which gradually decreases with the
increase of the turnover. When the annual turnover exceeds EUR 30,000, the full amount of VAT is levied.
This VAT relief regime is terminated as of | January 2025.

As of 1 January 2025, the VAT registration threshold is EUR 20,000. The supplier of goods and/or services
is not considered to be liable for VAT if their turnover during the current and preceding calendar year does
not amount (o more than EUR 20,000 per calendar year, unless they have been registered as a person liable to
VAT at their own request.

Finland has not implemented a threshold under which exceeding the Small and Medium sized enterprises
(SME) limit of EUR 20,000 has no consequences. From the time of exceeding the limit, the SME scheme can
no longer be applied.

If, as a result of exceeding the SME threshold, the SME regime can no longer be applied, taxpayers cannot
re-apply for using the SME scheme for a period of I year.

Finnish governmental bodies as well as municipalities are liable to VAT in the same way as private
companies, however, not with respect to activities in which they are engaged as public authorities.

A taxable person starting a taxable activity as defined in the VAT Law must notify the Finnish Tax
Administration before starting the activity. Finnish taxable persons use the same start-up notification form for
registering with the Trade Register, the Tax Administration’s VAT register, prepayment register and register of
employers.

If a taxable person does not register for VAT purposes in connection with the start-up but waits until their
business ID is obtained, it must use an amendment notification to register for VAT purposes.

Registration forms can be found using the following link: https://www.ytj fi/en/index/notifications. htm!

1.2 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for foreign taxable persons

Until 31 December 2024, there was no VAT registration threshold or exemption for taxable persons not
established in Finland.

As of 1 January 2025, the exemption threshold for SME’s of EUR 20,000 applies to taxable persons with
domicile in other EU countries than Finland, provided that the turnover of the taxable person in the EU during
the current and preceding calendar year does not exceed EUR 100,000 per calendar year and the person has
not been registered for VAT at their own request. Foreign taxable persons who cannot apply the exemption
based on the threshold rule must register if they perform taxable transactions for VAT purposes in Finland.

Finland | 185

--- Page 2 ---
There are three different kinds of general VAT registration types available. “Mandatory VAT registration” is
the registration type available for taxable persons who are liable to register for Finnish VAT purposes except
for situations where registering for “notification duty” is required. “Notification duty” is available in case
registration liability is to arise due to intra-Community transactions only. Taxable persons not established in
Finland and making other supplies of goods or services than those resulting in VAT registration liability are
upon application entitled to register for VAT purposes in Finland (“voluntary VAT registration”). The VAT ID
is automatically entered into the VIES system as a result of the VAT registration.

The National Board of Patents and Registration and the Finnish Tax Administration share a joint declaration
procedure for business information, the Business Information System, BIS (in Finnish Y7/), where all company
information can be reported with one single form, Completed forms, with appendices, must be sent to:

National Board of Patents and Registration — Tax Administration
Business Information System

P.O. Box 2000

00231 Helsinki

Finland

The following documents are to be submitted for the VAT registration:

+ start-up notification;

+ form VEROH 6204e or 6206e;

+ a trade register extract or a certificate of registration with the commercial register in the country of the
non-established person or other equivalent document (and, if needed, a Finnish, Swedish or English
translation of the relevant parts of the document); and

+ inthe event a fiscal representative is appointed, the following additional information is required:

* a letter of commitment by the fiscal representative;

+ a power of attorney authorizing the fiscal representative;

+ a Finnish or Swedish translation of the power of attorney; and

+ a document indicating the relevant company details of the representative.

After the notification form has been sent to the National Board of Patents and Registration, the registration
process normally takes from 3 weeks up to 2 months.

Registration forms can be found at: https://www.yij,fi/en/index/notifications. him!

13. VAT Grouping
Finnish VAT legislation allows VAT grouping.

VAT grouping is optional, meaning that a taxable person may choose whether to register or join a VAT group
when all the conditions are met. There is no minimum period for how long a taxable person must remain in a
VAT group.

In order to create a VAT group, the members must:

* be established in Finland;

* operate in the financial and/or insurance sector, or be under the direct or indirect control of such a
company/companies, or be a holding company of a credit institution or investment service firm or a parent
entity of an insurance group, or a company under the (joint) control of these kinds of entities; and

* have close financial, economic and organisational links with each other.

In addition, pure holding companies can also be included in the VAT group provided that they meet the
above-mentioned criteria,

‘Accompany may only belong to one VAT group at a time. The VAT group must appoint from its members a
company to be responsible for the VAT group's VAT reporting. However, the members of the VAT group are
jointly and severally liable for the payment of VAT.

186 | Finland

--- Page 3 ---
The VAT group members are treated as one single taxable person for VAT purposes. Consequently, VAT is not
accounted for supplies of goods and services within the VAT group.

14 Fiscal representative

Taxable persons not established in Finland and making supplies of goods or services other than those
resulting in VAT registration liability in Finland, are upon application entitled to register for VAT purposes
in Finland (“voluntary VAT registration”). In case of a voluntary VAT registration, a fiscal representative is
needed if the taxable person is established outside the EU in a state with which Finland has not conciuded
an agreement on mutual assistance with the competent authorities as regards indirect taxes. An agreement on
mutual assistance is currently in place only with Norway.

Fiscal representatives for VAT purposes are not required in any other cases.

The fiscal representative should be domiciled in Finland, be approved by the Finnish Tax Administration, and
have the knowledge and skills required for fulfilling the administrative obligations related to VAT.

The fiscal representative is responsible for all of the foreign taxable person’s administrative duties connected
to VAT liability, However, the fiscal representative is not jointly and severally liable for the payment of VAT
and penalties. The tax authorities may require a security from the non-established taxable person.

2. Taxable transactions

21 ‘Transfer of business

Section 19c of the Finnish VAT Law implements Articles 19 and 29 of the VAT Directive

Under the following conditions, a transfer of business is not considered a sale in the scope of the VAT (and,
thus, the assets transferred are not subject to VAT either):

* assets constitute a business, or a part of il, where all of the elements transferred are sufficient to allow an
independent economic activity to be carried on as defined in case law;

+ _ assets are sold to be used in the transferee’s taxable business activities entitling to VAT deductions;

* transferee continues to conduct such business activities immediately after the transfer; and

* transferee is registered for VAT at the time of the transfer.

2.2 Supplies free of charge

VAT is payable for the goods that are taken for private consumption, are given free of charge or are
transferred or taken to a use which does not entitle for VAT deduction. VAT is payable only if the VAT was
deducted for the goods or if the goods were produced in connection with VAT taxable business.

‘The provision of samples or customary, small value promotional gifts is not subject to VAT. There is no set
value for qualifying gifts as being of ‘small value’ in the Finnish VAT rules.

VAT is payable for the services that are carried out free of charge by a taxable person for their private use or
for that of their staff or, more generally, for purposes other than those of their business. VAT is payable only if
the VAT was deducted for the acquired service, or in case of self-performed services, the service was rendered
in connection with the taxable business and the taxable person supplies similar services to external parties.

2.3. Importation

2.3.1 Importation followed by an intra~Community supply

Importation of goods is exempt from VAT if the transport of the imported goods ends in another EU Member
State and if the sale of goods is exempt from VAT as an intra-Community supply. This requires that the

Finland | 187

--- Page 4 ---
importer is a taxable person. In addition, the tax exemption requires that the importer has received the
customer’s VAT number issued by another EU Member State and that the transport of goods to another EU
Member State can be proven.

2.3.2 Postponed accounting on importation ;
The possibility to defer the reporting and payment of import VAT is available for taxable persons registered
for VAT in Finland, These taxpayers declare the import VAT in their VAT returns. The deductible import VAT
can be reported in the same VAT return, which results in a situation where the import VAT does not have to
be paid as it can be deducted at the same time when it is declared, The taxpayers are also liable to calculate
the tax base and the import VAT themselves, The import VAT should be reported in the period that coincides
with the customs clearance date, Other than above mentioned taxpayers pay the import VAT to the Finnish
Customs at the time of the importation.

3. Place of supply

3.1 Consignment and call-off stock

‘Asa general rule, a transfer of goods to Finland from another EU Member State is regarded as an intra-
Community acquisition in Finland creating a liability to register for VAT (see also paragraph 1,2). However,
in order to avoid non-established taxable persons having to register for VAT to make taxable acquisitions of
consignment or of call-off stock, simplified procedures can be applied for allowing the consignee to account
for the VAT on the acquisition, provided that certain conditions are met. The VAT Law is in line with the
Articles of the EU VAT Directive concerning call- off stock arrangements.

Using the simplification is optional. The supplier may also choose to VAT register in Finland.

3.2 Installation supplies

Supplies of goods with installation/assembly are treated as supplied in Finland when they are installed or
assembled in Finland, and the same supplier sells both the goods and their installation/assembly. There is
no formal definition for the terms “installation” and “assembly”, but in general, the definition is regarded as
rather easily fulfilled when any installation/assembly work is required.

The shipment of goods from another EU Member State to be installed in Finland is not deemed an intra-
Community acquisition in Finland. Instead, a supply of goods with installation in Finland is subject to Finnish
VAT.

The normal rules on the reverse charge and VAT registration of a non-established supplier apply. The
applicability of the reverse charge is fairly broad in Finland (see paragraph 8.1) and may therefore be
applied to several situations where a foreign taxable person is supplying goods with installation in Finland.
It should, however, be noted that according to guidance given by the Finnish tax authorities an installation or
construction project, or several consecutive projects, are considered to result in a fixed establishment for the
supplier if they last for more than 9 months.

33 Distance sales

Distance sales refer to the sale of goods transported to private individuals or buyers comparable to them (¢.g.,
online shopping). In the BU, distance sales of goods are taxed in the country of the consumer if the annual
turnover of distance sales of goods, as well as sale of radio and television broadcasting services, electronically
supplied services, and telecommunications services, for a business established within the BU area exceeds
10,000 euros in total.

The supplier must register for VAT in all Member States where they sell goods as distance sales. Alternatively.
the seller can register as a user of a special VAT scheme (hereinafter the Union scheme) in one EU Member
State. The Union scheme allows for centralized reporting and payment obligations through this single EU
country, thus facilitating the management of VAT-related obligations.

188 | Finland

--- Page 5 ---
For certain distance sales from outside the EU (imported goods), a centralized iOSS scheme is available for
reporting consignments not exceeding the value of EUR 150.

3.4 Simplified triangulation

Under the VAT Law, the simplified triangulation rules have been implemented in line with the EU VAT

Directive.

In triangular transactions, VAT is not chargeable in Finland in respect of an intra-Community acquisition in

the following circumstances:

* acquisition is made by a middleman (taxable person) not established in Finland providing a VAT
identification number from another EU Member State than Finland and the country of dispatch;

+ intra-Community acquisition is made by the middieman for the purpose of a subsequent supply of the
goods in Finland;

* goods acquired by the middleman are directly dispatched or transported from an EU Member State to the
person to whom the middleman makes the subsequent supply;

* _ the person to whom the subsequent supply is made is another taxable person or a non-taxable legal person
identified for VAT purposes in Finland; and

* the person to whom the subsequent supply is made has been designated as the person liable for the tax
due on the subsequent supply by the middleman not established in Finland.

The simplified triangulation rules cannot be applied if the middleman in a triangular transaction is established
in Finland, Where Fintand is the country of arrival, the wording of the Finnish legislation does not preclude
the application of the simplified triangulation rules if the middleman is VAT registered in Finland or in the
country of dispatch,

35 Acquisition threshold

The threshold for the acquisition of goods by non-taxable legal persons and taxable persons engaged in
exempt activities from suppliers established in another EU Member State is EUR 10,000

3.6 Effective use and enjoyment

Currently Finland has not implemented any rules on use and enjoyment based on Article 59a of the EU VAT
Directive.

4, Chargeable event & Chargeability of VAT

41 Principles

In the case of supply of goods, the VAT becomes, in principle, chargeable at the time the goods are
delivered. The VAT due on services, in principle, becomes chargeable at the time the services are performed.
Alternatively, a taxpayer can also charge and report the VAT according to the date of the invoice or, if no
invoice was issued, according to the date the payment was received. Precondition for such an allocation is
that the invoice was issued or the payment was received during the same financial year as the delivery of
the goods or the performance of the services took place. At the end of the fiscal year, the taxpayer is liable
to report and pay VAT for the supplies that took place during the fiscal year in question, but for which the
taxpayer has not yet issued an invoice or received a payment.

4.2 Advance payments
Ifthe payment is received before the goods are delivered or the service is performed, the VAT for the supply
becomes chargeable according to the date the payment or part of the payment was received.

4.3 Continuous supplies

Continuous supplies of goods are considered being delivered and services performed at the end of each
accounting period and the VAT becomes chargeable at the end of each accounting period. For example,

Finland | 189

--- Page 6 ---
in case of a lease subject to VAT for which monthly instalments are paid, the service is considered being
performed on a monthly basis

Continuous supplies of goods over a period of more than one calendar month which are dispatched or
transported from Finland to another EU Member State and which are supplied or (ransferced VAT exempt,
shall be regarded as being delivered on expiry of each calendar month until such time as the supply comes to
an end. Also, the continuous acquisition of goods over a period of more than one calendar month, which are
dispatched or transported from another EU Member State to Finland and for which the acquirer is liable to
account the VAT, shall be regarded as being delivered on expiry of each calendar month until such time as the
supply comes to an end,

Services ongoing over a period of more than one year, that do not give rise to settlements or payments in that
period and for which the customer is liable to account for the VAT on the basis of Article 196 of the EU VAT
Directive, are regarded as being supplied on the expiry of each calendar year up to the time the provision of
the services ceases.

44 Cash accounting

In some cases, VAT is paid over to the Finnish state on the basis of cash received during the respective VAT period
as opposed to making payment on the basis of supplied goods and services during the period. The cash accounting
regime is available to taxable persons whose annual turnover does not exceed EUR $00,000 and to taxable
persons who do not have a legal obligation to keep books. When applying cash accounting, the VAT should
however be paid after 12 months have passed since the delivery of the goods or performance of the services.

5. Taxable amount

5.1 Bad Debt Relief

A bad debt relief is available to taxable persons who can prove that the amount of VAT they did not receive
from the customer became a bad debt in the relevant period.

When claiming a bad debt relief, the taxable person deducts the amount of VAT it is reclaiming from the
output VAT on the supplies for the period in which the loss is considered to have arisen in accordance
with good bookkeeping practice. The supplier must be able to show that a bad debt exists, and it must
have information showing that the customer lacks the financial means to pay the debt (e.g, bankruptcy or
unsuccessful execution attempt).

If the taxable person later receives the payment of the VAT, it will have to account for the VAT to the tax
authorities.

5.2 Cash Discounts

Assume that the supplier sends the following invoice:

“Supply of goods EUR 1,000
25.5% VAT EUR 255
Total to be paid EUR 1,255

If payment is received by us within the next 14 days, you can subtract 2% of the invoice as a cash discount.”

In the described scenario, input and output VAT should be adjusted by the cash discount used. The Finnish
Tax Administration considers that suppliers and customers may adjust their input and output VAT without

an obligation for the suppliers to issue separate credit notes for these frequent commercial cash discounts.
However, either the discounted total payable amount including VAT or the amount of the discount including,
the VAT should be ineluded in the invoice. The end result is that both parties pay/deduct the VAT based on the
amount actually received/paid.

190 | Finland

--- Page 7 ---
53 Open Market Value

In regard to Article 80 of the EU VAT Directive and possibilities to implement the open market value in
transactions between related parties, Finland has only implemented Article 80(1)(a). This rule allows the
Finnish Tax Administration to implement the open market value only when the consideration paid for a sale
or intra-Community acquisition is lower than the open market value, and the recipient of the supply does not
have a full right of deduction. The open market value rule is not applied if the supplier is not liable to pay
VAT based on the rules for free of charge supplies.

54 Returnable Packaging

The VAT base can be adjusted based on the consideration received for the sale of retuned packaging. The
supplier must provide the buyer with a credit invoice for the returned packages if the consideration for the
packaging was included in the taxable amount, Reference to the original invoice is required on the credit
invoice only if this is feasible.

6. VAT rates

6.1 Standard rate
The standard VAT rate is 25.5%.

6.2 Reduced rate

There are two reduced VAT rates in use in Finland. As of 1 January 2025, most of the goods and services
previously subject to the reduced rate of 10% were transferred to the scope of the reduced rate of 14%. At the
same time, menstrual products, incontinence products and diapers were transferred from the standard rate to
the reduced rate of 14%.

The reduced rate of 14% is applied to the following goods and services:

+ food;

+ restaurant and catering services;

* animal food;

+ books (both physical and digital);

+ domestic passenger transport;

+ transfer of the right to use premises for accommodation or harbour facilities:

+ services for physical exercise including use of facilities used for physical exercise;

» admission fees to theatres, circuses, musical and dancing performances, cinemas, exhibitions, sports
events, zoos, museums and other corresponding cultural and recreational events and institutions including
the streaming of such events;

+ medicines;

+ menstrual products, incontinence products, and diapers;

* certain works of art;

+ performance fees charged by performing artists, other performers and athletes who have opted for VAT
liability; and

+ compensation related to copyright when paid to an organisation representing copyright holders.

The reduced rate of 14% is not applicable to alcoholic beverages and tobacco products.

‘The reduced rate of 10% is applied to sales of physical and digital newspapers and periodicals and, until 31
December 2025, to the amounts received by the Finnish Broadcasting Company from the State Television and
Radio Fund and the compensations received by Alands Radio och TV Ab from the media fees collected in the
Aland region. As of | January 2026, the amounts received by the previously mentioned broadcasting entities
will be transferred to the reduced rate of 14%.

Finland | 19)

--- Page 8 ---
63 Super-reduced and zero rates

There is no super-reduced rate in Finland.

Finland has a zero rate for:

+ sales of an edition of a newspaper or periodical by the printer, published at least 4 times a year, to a non-
profit organisation which publishes the newspaper or periodical mainly for its members;

+ sales of gold to the Central Bank; and

+ sale of vessels over 10 metres long (excluding those used for sports and leisure).

7. Exemptions

7.1 Exemptions with the right of deduction

The exemption from VAT with a right of deduction applies to the following supplies of goods and services

related to international trade and trade under special regimes (warehouses):

* — intra-Community supplies and exports;

+ _ sales of certain services in connection with international trade with third countries;

= international passenger transport;

* — transport of goods to and from Madeira and the Azores;

+ intermediation with regard to certain VAT exempt goods and services;

* — services of travel agents when they relate to the goods or services provided to the immediate needs of the
customers by businesses outside of the EU;

+ sales of goods and services for the needs of vessels used for navigation on the high seas and carrying
passengers for reward or used for the purpose of commercial, industrial or fishing activities, or to aircraft
used by airlines operating for reward chiefly on international routes, including sales and rental of aircraft;

+ sales of goods under VAT warehousing procedure or customs control;

+ sales of certain services performed on goods under VAT warehousing procedure or customs control;

+ goods supplied to travellers resident outside the EU under retail export schemes or through tax-free shops
under certain conditions;

+ _ sales of goods and services to those travelling abroad on vessels or aircraft;

+ sales to certain diplomatic bodies and similar; and

+ _ sales of financial and insurance services to businesses established outside of the EU.

7.1.1 Intra-Community supplies

A precondition for the zero rating in case of an intra~-Community supply is that the customer is registered as
a taxable person in another EU Member State and the goods are transported to another EU Member State.
The supplier must prove that the transport to another FU Member State has taken place by means of a bill
of lading, transport invoice or some other corresponding document regarding the transport. These rules can
still be used in order to prove the transport besides the presumptions as set out in Article 45a of the Council
Implementing Regulation 282/2011

7.1.2 Export supplies

In order to prove zero rating in case of exports, the supplier must have evidence that the goods have left the
EU and, in certain cases, prove the status of the customer. The evidence required depends on the type of
export.

7.1.3 Warehousing

7.1.3.1 VAT warehouse

In Finland, the VAT warehouse regime can be applied to the raw materials listed in Annex V of the VAT

Directive, such as mineral oils, grain, cocoa beans, coffee, certain metals etc, and pulp (CN codes 4701
4706). The warehouse keeper is required to obtain a Finnish tax authorities’ licence for keeping a VAT

warehouse.

192 | Finland

--- Page 9 ---
The supplies, intra-Commmunity acquisitions and imports of goods which are placed in the VAT warehouse
are exempt from VAT, Also, services performed on the goods in the VAT warchouse are VAT exempted.
Processing of the goods is not allowed.

VAT becomes due when the goods are released from the VAT warehouse regime. The customer releasing the
goods from the VAT warehouse becomes liable for the payment of the VAT. At the same time the warehouse
keeper is jointly liable for the VAT except in cases where the warehouse keeper acts in good faith or where no
fault or negligence can be imputed to him

7.1.3.2 Excise warehouse

Excise goods under suspension of excise duties can be stored in an excise warehouse. Supply and transfer

of goods, that are meant for certain purposes of equipping an aircraft used in international traffic, to be sold
on an aircraft or on a vessel used in international traffic or to travellers travelling to outside the EU, is VAT
exempt when the goods are placed in an excise warehouse. Certain mineral oils placed in an excise warehouse
are also exempted from VAT.

7.1.3.3 Bonded warehouse

It is possible to place goods in a bonded warehouse in Finland. A licence obtained by a warehouse keeper
from the customs authorities is required for a bonded warehouse in Finland.

If the goods coming from a non-EU country, which are not declared for release into free circulation, are
placed under a bonded warehouse regime, no customs duties and VAT are due. When the goods are released
from the warehouse for free circulation, duties and VAT become due.

The supply of goods within a bonded warehouse is exempt, The possible supplies of services related to goods
placed in a warehouse are also exempted, provided that they are supplied within the warehouse. Processing of
the goods is however not allowed.

7.2 Exemptions without right to deduction

The following exempt supplies do not give the right to deduct or obtain a refund of input VAT:

* health and medical care;

* social welfare;

+ sale and letting of real estate and rights relating to immovable property (with some exceptions which are
mentioned below);

+ insurance services;

+ financial services;

* general, vocational and higher education:

+ sales of investment gold;

* lotteries and betting;

+ certain fees to performing artists;

* fees for using certain copyrights of an author;

* certain cemetery services;

+ self-picked wild berries and mushrooms, sold by the person who picked them;

+ interpretation services for the deaf;

+ certain sales made by blind persons;

* universal postal service;

* transactions concerning bank notes and coins used as a legal tender, with the exception of collector’s
items; and

+ sales of goods which have been subjected to restriction of input VAT deduction.

Even though sales and letting of real estate and supply of easement or similar rights relating to immovable
property are exempt from VAT, the following services are taxable at the standard rate:

+ _ sales of construction services;
+ sales of the right to take soil or stone substance, or sales of logging rights, hunting or fishing rights;
* transfer of rights to use rooms, camping sites, cabins or other similar premises in connection with hotel

Finland | 193

--- Page 10 ---
and camping activities and comparable accommodation activities;

+ occasional transfers of the right to use conference, exhibition or sports premises or other similar premises;

+ rental of parking space for vehicles;

+ supply of harbour or airfield facilities for use by vessels or aircraft;

+ rental of equipment or a machine permanently installed in a building or construction;

+ transfer of rights to use safe-deposit boxes;

+ supply of publicity or advertising space, places for amusement machines or soft drink dispensers, or for
other similar devices, or for games, or immovable property; and

+ supply to the State of comprehensive maintenance services regarding a public road or railroad.

7.3. Option for taxation

Lessor can opt for VAT for letting immovable property if the leased premises are used for activities which
give a right to VAT deduction or the end-user is the state, university, university of applied sciences or a
provider of private vocational education. VAT-taxable letting of immovable property requires a specific VAT
registration. Retrospective VAT registration for letting immovable property is not possible, except in case
of letting a new property, in which case the VAT registration can be applied within six months after the new
property has been taken into use.

Under certain circumstances it is also possible to opt for VAT for the supply of investment gold. Also
performing artists can opt for VAT. It is not possible to opt for VAT on financial services.

8. Liability

8.1 Reverse charge

In Finland, the reverse charge mechanism is — besides the reverse charge of Articles 44 and 196 of the EU
VAT Directive services - applicable to various types of transactions. In addition, there is also the reverse
charge for the supply of natural gas and electricity supplied by non-resident suppliers to taxable dealers in
Finland.

81.1 General reverse charge mechanism - non-resident suppliers (Article 194 Directive)

Reverse charge applies to most services and the supply of goods taxable in Finland made by a foreign taxable

person not having a fixed establishment in Finland to a Finnish established and VAT registered taxable person.

This means that the customer is liable to account for the VAT on the supply. The domestic reverse charge

cannot, however, be applied in case of the following supplies:

+ the customer is a foreign taxable person who does not have a fixed establishment and who is not VAT
registered in Finland;

+ passenger transport services; and

+ admissions to cultural, artistic, sporting, scientific, educational, entertainment or similar events, such as
fairs and exhibitions, or of ancillary services related to the admission.

The reverse charge applies to the supply of goods by a foreign established taxable person even if he is VAT
registered in Finland, provided that he does not have a fixed establishment in Finland. When the conditions
for the applicability as described above are fulfilled, the application of the reverse charge is mandatory.
However, the reverse charge cannot be applied if the foreign taxable person has VAT registered through a
voluntary VAT registration.

‘The invoice must show the customer’s Finnish VAT number and indicate that the customer is liable for VAT
(e.g. the phrase “reverse charge” on the invoice)

8.1.2 Specific domestic reverse charge (Article 199 Directive)

194 | Finland

--- Page 11 ---
8.1.2.1 Construction sector

In Finland, the reverse charge is applied to certain construction services. When the reverse charge applies, the

customer is liable to account for the VAT on the supplies of construction services. Construction sector targeted

reverse charge is applied when both conditions are met:

+ the supply is considered either a construction service or renting of staff for construction services for VAT
purposes:

* _ aservice is regarded as a construction service when construction or repair is performed to an
immovable property, including the supply of goods relating to such service.

+ the scope of the services to which the reverse charge for the construction sector applies is not clearly
defined. General guidelines do exist, but there is some room for interpretation. A full case-specific
assessment needs to be done. Under the Finnish case law, the scope of the construction sector has
been considered to be rather wide;

+ the customer is a company supplying construction services or renting staff for construction services

more often than occasionally. These rules are also applied if the customer does not carry out construction

activities itself but resells construction services to companies supplying construction services more often

than occasionally.

These rules apply both to resident and non-resident customers and suppliers. The application of the reverse
charge is mandatory when these conditions are fulfilled.

The reverse charge mechanism applies to e.g. the following services connected with immovable property:
* excavation and foundation work;

* construction work;

+ construction installation;

+ finishing of constructions;

* rental contracts covering both equipment and operator for the construction work;

* on-site cleaning of constructions; and

+ supply of staff to a site.

The reverse charge mechanism does not generally apply to e.g. the following services:

+ installation of equipment used for production;

+ architectural services, planning and design work, other engineering and technical services;
* rental contracts covering only the equipment;

* outdoor cleaning services (including roads, driveways, parks, airports);

* — transport; and

+ building maintenance.

‘The invoice must show the customer’s Finnish VAT number and include a reference to the reverse charge (e.g.
the text “reverse charge — section 8 ¢ of the Finnish VAT Act”).

8.1.2.2 Emission rights

The reverse charge applies to supplies of emission rights provided that the customer is VAT registered.

8.1.2.3 Sales of scrap metal and metal waste

The reverse charge applies to supplies of scrap metal and metal waste provided that the customer is VAT
registered, The scope of the goods subject to this mandatory reverse charge is determined based on the goods’
CN codes.

8.2 di nt and Several Liability

‘The partners of a general partnership and the general partners of a limited partnership are jointly and severally
liable for the partnership’s tax. Similarly, the members of a consortium or a ship-owning company are liable
for the tax of the consortium or company.

‘The members of the VAT group are jointly and severally liable for the group's VAT liabilities.

Finland | 195

--- Page 12 ---
‘The joint and several liability of a partner, a consortium member and a member of a VAT group begins at the
start of the month during which they join the partnership, consortium or VAT group and ends by the end of the
month in which they leave the partnership, consortium or VAT group.

9. Recovery of input VAT

9.1 Non-recoverable input VAT

Taxable persons cannot recover VAT on the following:

+ goods and services not used for taxable business;

+ premises in private or recreational use by a taxable person or ils staff, including goods and services
connected with it or its use;

+ goods and services related to commuting to a regular working place by a taxable person or his staff,

* goods and services used for business entertainment purposes;

+ passenger cars, motorcycles, and caravans, as well as goods and services related to their use including but
not limited to lease, repairs and fuel; and

+ vessels and aircraft which by their structure are mainly intended for recreational or sports purposes, as,
well as goods and services related to their use.

‘The restriction on the right to recover VAT on vehicles and vessels does not apply to a vehicle or vessel that
has been acquired for sale, rental, or use in professional passenger transport or driving instruction, nor to a
passenger car that has been acquired exclusively for use that entitles to a deduction.

92 Excess input VAT

Excess inpul VAT is immediately recoverable and refunded by the tax authorities, potentially after a request
for additional verification from the tax authorities.

93 Adjustment periods

In Finland, special treatment for capital goods is restricted to construction and renovation services including
certain equipment when they become a part of the immovable property as a result of their installation.

The adjustment period for construction and renovation services related to immovable property is 10 years.

‘The first year of adjustment is the year in which the construction or rentovation work is completed, or the
immovable property is taken into use.

9.4 VAT refund to EU taxable persons

The refund application must be submitted electronically through the portal of the tax authorities of the EU
Member State in which the taxable person is established.

A taxable person can apply for VAT refund through the portal provided that he does not have a fixed
establishment in Finland and he does not perform any taxable activities in Finland other than the following
supplies:

+ sales subject to the reverse charge mechanism;

+ _ sales to the Finnish state; and

+ sale of certain zero-rated transport and related services.

If the taxpayer performs intra-Community supplies, exports or other zero-rated activities in Finland (besides

the ones mentioned above), he cannot apply for VAT refund through the refund application. Instead, he is
required to register for VAT to refund the VAT.

196 | Finland

--- Page 13 ---
The annual minimum limit (for applications that are made for a calendar year or the remainder of a calendar
year) is FUR 50. The interim minimum limit (for applications that are made for less than a calendar year but
at least 3 months) is EUR 400.

The minimum period for an application is 3 consecutive calendar months in one calendar year, unless itis the
remainder of the calendar year, The maximum period for an application is a calendar year

‘The deadline for the application is 30 September of the year following the year for which the application is
made.

Supporting documents (e.g. the original invoices / copies of invoices) are generally not required. However,
the tax authorities may request for additional information,

The tax authorities must issue a decision on the refund application within 4 months after receiving the
application. The period in which the authorities must make their decision is extended to 6 months or 8 months
if the authorities have requested additional information.

Ita refund is granted, it will be processed within 10 business days and paid to the bank account number
provided to the tax authorities.

Ifthe processing time of the application exceeds what is prescribed, and payment is delayed, interest will be
paid on the refund. However, no interest will be payable if the applicant has failed to provide information or
additional information requested. The interest rate corresponds to the interest paid on VAT refund payments to
Finnish taxable persons,

The restrictions stipulated by the Finnish VAT Law on a taxable person's right to deduct also apply to VAT
refunds paid to foreign taxable persons (see paragraph 9.1),

Refund decisions may be appealed by lodging a written appeal. The appeal should be addressed to the Board
of Adjustment and sent to the Tax Administration either in Finnish or Swedish. Letters of appeal cannot be
submitted electronically.

Appeals should be submitted within 3 years after the end of the calendar year to which the refund period
relates. However, the appeal period is always at least 60 days after the date when the decision was
communicated to the applicant (excluding the notification day),

95 VAT refund to non-EU taxable persons

‘The right to a VAT refund is not reciprocal, i.e. it also applies to taxable persons from countries without a
corresponding refund system.

The taxable person can apply for a VAT refund with the application provided that he does not have a fixed
establishment in Finland, and he does not perform any taxable activities in Finland other than the following
supplies:

+ _ sales subject to the reverse charge mechanism;

* sales to the Finnish state; and

+ sale of certain zero-rated transport and related services,

If the taxpayer performs intra~Community supplies, exports or other zero-rated activities in Finland (besides
the ones mentioned above), he cannot apply for VAT refund through the refiund application. Instead, he is
required to register for VAT to refund the VAT.

The application is made by filling out and submitting an application form in Finnish, Swedish or English,
An original certificate issued by the tax authorities in the applicant's home country stating the nature of the
applicant's business operations, issued not more than one year before the application, must be enclosed. The
tax authorities may also request additional information such as invoices or import documents,

Finland | 197

--- Page 14 ---
‘The application form is available for download on the Tax Administration's webpage:
https://tinyurl.combyujmedfa

The annual minimum limit (for applications that are made for a calendar year or the remainder of a calendar
year) is EUR 50, The interim minimum limit (for applications that are made for less than a calendar year but
at least 3 months) is EUR 400.

‘The minimum period for making the application is 3 consecutive calendar months in one calendar year, unless
it is the remainder of the calendar year. The maximum period for making the application is one calendar year.

‘The deadline for making the application is 30 June of the year following the year for which the application is
made.

It should be noted that a refund can only be made to a bank account ina financial institution located in an EU
Member State.

‘There are no prescribed processing times, but they are usually between 2 to 8 months as of the filing date of
the application,

Refund decisions may be appealed by lodging a written complaint addressed to the Board of Adjustment
and sent to the Tax Administration either in Finnish or Swedish. Letters of appeal cannot be submitted
electronically. Appeals should be submitted within 3 years after the end of the calendar year to which the
refund period relates. However, the appeal period is always at least 60 days after the date when the decision
was communicated to the applicant (excluding the notification day).

‘The restrictions in the Finnish VAT Law regarding the right to deduction also apply to VAT refunds for
foreign taxable persons (see paragraph 9.1).

10. Administrative obligations

10.1 Invoices

10.1.1 Invoice content

Invoices must contain the following information for VAT purposes:

+ date of issue;

+ sequential number, based on one or more series, which uniquely identifies the invoice;

«VAY number of the taxable person who supplied the goods or services to which the invoice relates;

© customer's VAT number in case of the reverse charge and intra-Community supplies;

+ full names and addresses of the supplier and customer;

+ quantity and nature of the goods supplied or the extent and nature of the services rendered;

+ date on which the goods or services were supplied or the date on which a prepayment on account was
made;

+ price exclusive of VAT per VAT rate, displaying the unit price and any rebates, discounts and credits (if
not included in the unit price);

+ VAT rate applied;

+ amount of VAT payable;

+ incase of an exemption, a reference to the applicable provision of the VAT Directive, or to the
corresponding national provision, or any other reference indicating that the supply of goods or services is
exempt;

= where the customer is liable for payment of VAT, the following reference to the reverse charge: “reverse
charge” (“kdidnnetty verovelvollisuus” in Finnish);

«if the customer has prepared the invoice, the invoice must include a reference to self-billing: “selF-billing”
(or “itselaskutus” in Finnish);

+ incase ofa sale of a new means of transport to another EU Member State, the invoice needs to contain

198 | Finland

--- Page 15 ---
the details necessary to identify such goods:

* incase of applying the VAT margin scheme when second-hand goods, works of art, antiques and
collector's items or services of travel agents are supplied, the applicable reference:
* margin scheme, second-hand goods (voittomarginaalijerjestelma — kdytetyt tavarat” in Finnish);
* margin scheme, works of att (“voittomarginaalijeirjestelmd — taide-esineet” in Finnish);
* margin scheme, collector’s items and antiques (Cvoittomarginaalijérjestelmda — keréily-ja

antiikkiesineet” in Finnish); and

* margin scheme, travel agents (“voittomarginaalijairjestelmé ~ matkatoimistot” in Finnish);

+ _ incase of taxable supplies of investment gold, an indication concerning this; and

+ if an invoice is amended, a reference to the original invoice.

10.1.2 Time limits

The Finnish VAT Law only sets time limits for invoices for intra-Community supplies and supplies of services
for which the reverse charge applies under Articles 44 and 196 of the Directive. For these supplies, invoices
must be issued by the 15% day of the month following the month in which the goods were delivered, or
services supplied.

10.1.3 Currency
Itis allowed to issue invoices in a foreign currency. The amount of the VAT payable must be in BUR,

10.1.4 Conversion and exchange rate

Foreign currencies are converted into EUR by using the latest selling price published by a commercial bank
or the European Central Bank for the date the VAT becomes due in accordance with the rules on tax point.

10.1.5 Simplified invoice

A simplified invoice must contain the following information:

* — date of issue;

+ name and VAT number of the supplier;

* quantity and nature of the goods supplied or the extent and nature of the services rendered: and
* amount of VAT payable per VAT rate or taxable amount per VAT rate.

Simplified invoices may be used in the following situations:

+ when the total amount is not higher than EUR 400;

+ in retail trade that sell almost exclusively to consumers;

* for restaurant and catering services or passenger transport not meant for resale; and
* receipts issued by parking meters and similar automatic vending machines.

10.1.6 Self-billing

In Finland, self-billing is allowed if the supplier and customer have agreed on it and if an approval procedure
hhas been put in place allowing the supplier to approve the invoices. The supplier remains responsible for the
correctness of the invoices. Invoices must include a reference to self-billing.

10.1.7 Storage of invoices

Invoices must be stored for at least 6 years after the end of the year in which the accounting period, to which
the invoice relates, ended. Regarding real estate investments, the storage period is 13 years after the end of
the calendar year, in which the accounting period to which the invoices relate, ended.

Invoices may be stored abroad, but they must be accessible from Finland to auditors and authorities without
delay. The authenticity of the origin, the integrity of the content and the legibility of the invoices must be
ensured from the moment of issue until the end of the period for their storage.

Records for supplies under the special scheme for distance sales should be kept for a period of 10 years from
the end of the year during which the transactions were carried out.

10.1.8 Electronic invoicing

In Finland, electronic invoicing is allowed provided that the invoicing and archiving method meets the
requirements set out in VAT and bookkeeping legislation, Taxable persons may choose any form of electronic

Finland | 199

--- Page 16 ---
invoicing as long as the authenticity of origin, integrity of content and readability are guaranteed. Customers
are allowed to refuse electronic invoices.

10.2 Compliance

10.2.1 VAT return period

In general, taxable persons are required to file VAT returns on a monthly basis. However, taxable persons with
‘an annual turnover of not more than EUR 100,000 may report VAT on a quarterly basis. Furthermore, taxable
persons with an annual turnover of not more than EUR 30,000 may report VAT on an annual basis. These
longer reporting periods are only available upon application or the tax authorities’ decision.

Electronic filing of VAT returns is mandatory. Submission of paper returns is only allowed in exceptional
situations.
10.2.2 Filing of a VAT return and payment

‘The VAT return is due on the 12 day of the second month following the tax period to which it relates. If an
annual reporting period is used, the VAT return is due on the last day of February in the following year.

Even if there are no transactions to report, a nil return must be submitted.
The VAT payable is due on the 12 day of the second month following the tax period to which it relates.

‘A copy of the VAT return can be found at:
hups:/Ainyurl.com/S49pk9mnf
10.2.3. European sales listing

Suppliers selling goods or services to taxable persons in other EU Member States must file a European sales
listing (a recapitulative statement), No threshold applies. The due date for filing the European sales listing is
the 20" of the calendar month following the month of the supply.

The monthly European sales listing must be submitted electronically. Submission of paper returns is only
allowed in exceptional situations.

A copy of the electronic form for European sales list can be downloaded from: https./tinyurl.com/44xp86az

10.2.4 National recapitulative statement

When applying the call-off stock simplification, the transfers of goods to the call-off stock in another EU
Member State need to be reported in a call-off stock report. This is an enclosure to the European sales listing.

The due date for filing the call-off stock report is the 20" of the calendar month following the month of the
transfer. The return must be submitted for the month in which the transfer to the call-off stock began.

A copy of the electronic form for call-off stock report can be downloaded from:
hutps.//tinyurl.com/bdd7dfew

10.2.5 Tax assessment period

‘The tax assessment period is 3 years from the end of the relevant tax period. This means that in the year 2025,
the last year open for assessment (payable or reclaimable VAT) is the year 2022.

‘Under certain circumstances, the tax authorities may extend the period by deciding on an extension before
the normal tax assessment period has been reached. This is an exceptional procedure meant for material cases
under certain specific circumstances. In addition, in case of tax frauds the tax authorities may impose VAT
until the end of the calendar year following the year in which such a crime was prosecuted,

200 | Finiand

--- Page 17 ---
10.3 Penalties

10.3.1 Default penalties for late registration
In Finland an administrational penalty of up to EUR 5,000 may be imposed for late VAT registration.

10.3.2 Default penalties for not filing a VAT return or a European sales listing on time

Ifa VAT return is submitted after the due date, the Tax Administration will impose a late filing penalty of
EUR 3 per day for the first 45 days after the due date until the VAT return is submitted (i.e. up to EUR 135).
If the return is submitted later than 45 days after the due date, the late filing penalty is EUR 135 plus 2% of
the amount of the VAT payable. In case VAT is reported late on a revised VAT return submitted more than 45
days after the due date, the amount of late filing penalty is 2% of the VAT payable not reported earlier. When
imposing a late filing penalty, the excess amount of refundable VAT reported is equated with the VAT payable
reported late. In any case, the maximum amount of the late filing penalty imposed on the basis of VAT
payable is EUR 15,000 per tax period (typically a calendar month)

If European sales listing is submitted after the due date or if it is incomplete or incorrect, the Tax
Administration may impose a penalty amounting to BUR 200. Penalties are usually imposed for continuous
failures only, or after failing to meet the tax authorities” specific request to submit or correct a report.

10.3.3 Default penalties for not paying VAT on time to the tax authorities

If VAT has not been paid on time, late payment interest must be paid. Late payment interest is 11.5% in 2025.
‘The rate can be adjusted once a year. Interest will start to accrue on the next day following the due date and it
will stop accruing on the date of payment, both days included.

10.3.4 Default penalties on VAT assessment when VAT is not reported correctly

Penalties (so-called ‘tax increase’) are raised if persons liable for tax have paid less tax than what was due,
have submitted incorrect information or have neglected entirely their obligation to submit tax returns,

‘The amount of the penalty depends on the severity and frequency of the failure as follows:

* typically 10% of the VAT payable;

+ in the range of 15 to 50% of the VAT payable when one’s obligations are neglected frequently or one’s
actions evidence disregard for one’s tax liabilities;

* 25% for VAT the amount of which is estimated by the tax authorities in the absence of information from
the taxable person; and

+ fixed amount of up to EUR 200 in cases where there was no VAT payable.

10.3.5 Offence penalties

Please see paragraph 10.3.4 for administrational sanctions in case of gross negligence. If actions are evaluated
from a criminal law point of view, criminal sanctions governed by the Finnish Criminal Code may be
imposed.

10.4 Intrastat

The monthly Intrastat return must be filed to the Finnish Customs by the 10" working day of the month
following the reporting month.

10.4.1 Intrastat threshold

In 2025 the threshold triggering the obligation to provide information is EUR 800,000 for arrivals and EUR
800,000 for dispatches.

10.4.2 Intrastat data to be reported
The following information must be reported:

+ statistical period;

* commodity code;

* country of consignment (arrivals)/country of destination (dispatches);
* country of origin;

Finland | 201

--- Page 18 ---
+ nature of transactions;

+ mode of transport;

+ net weight in kilograms;

+ supplementary unit (e.g. litres, items, pairs elc.);

+ invoice value;

+ statistical value (voluntary information); and

+ invoice value/statistical value in another currency and currency conversion;
+ the VAT ID of the trading partner; and

* the country of origin for departures.

It is also obligatory to file Intrastat reports for distance sales if the threshold is exceeded.

10.5 Additional compliance requirements

There are no additional requirements.

Information received from:

Henna Jovio and Anna-Riikka Nummi

Borenius Attorneys Ltd

henna jovio@borenius.com, anna-riikka.nummi@borenius.com
www borenius.com

202 | Finland

--- Page 19 ---
France

The European Union (EU) VAT Directive is implemented in France through various legal and regulatory acts
aggregated in the “Code Général des Impdts”, ie. the French Tax Code (hereafter referred to as the “CGI” or
“VAT Code”). VAT is referred to in France as “‘taxe sur la valeur ajoutée” or “TVA”,

a, Taxable persons

1.1 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for domestic taxable persons

As from | March 2025, the finance bill for 2025 has introduced a unique yearly threshold of EUR 25,000, for
all the transactions carried out, permitting a taxable person to benefit from a VAT exemption and a simplified
tax system. If in the year N-1, the taxable person is below the threshold, it can benefit in the year N from the
VAT exemption up to EUR 27,500.

Alll types of transactions (goods and services) | Thresholds (as from
2025)

Nl EUR 25,000

N EUR 27,500

However, this threshold is being discussed and is suspended until | June 2025. In the meantime, the former
thresholds still apply:

‘Transactions Thresholds (turnover 2024) _ | Thresholds (turnover 2025)
Supplies of goods, sales for EUR 91,900 and EUR 85,000 and
consumption on the promises and EUR 101,000 EUR 93,500
accommodation services (exemption) :
Other supplies of services (exemption) | EUR 36,800 and EUR 37,500 and
EUR 39,100 EUR 41,250
Specific activities of lawyers, EUR 47,700 and EUR 50,000 and
attorneys, authors and artists- EUR 58,600 EUR 55,000
performers (specific exemption)
Other activities of lawyers, attorneys, | EUR 19,600 and EUR 35,000 and
authors and artists-performers (specific | EUR 23,700 EUR 38,500
exemption)

Small French established taxable persons are entitled to benefit from the VAT exemption scheme in the other
EU countries provided that the transactions remain under the below thresholds:

* The thresholds conditions in France that will be in force from 2025;

* The turnover threshold covering the entire EU of EUR 100,000.

The registration application must be submitted on the Electronic Business Formalities Counter (“Guichet
unique”) (hitps://formalites.entreprises.gouv.fr/), which is operated by the National Institute of Industrial
Property (INPI).

Further information can be downloaded at the following link: https://tinyurl.com/2pzdxww9

1.2 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for foreign taxable persons

There is no registration threshold for foreign legal entities which need to register for VAT purposes in France
except when they benefit from SME Scheme.

France | 203

--- Page 20 ---
‘The following operations trigger a VAT registration: domestic sale of goods to customers not VAT registered
in France, distance sales of goods in France out of the OSS mechanism, intra-Community supply of goods
from France, intra-Community acquisition of goods in France, export of goods from France, supply of
services with a place of supply in France Lo customers not VAT registered in France, importation of goods in
France, subcontracting on construction work.

EU taxable persons can register directly or through an agent. Depending on their country of establishment,
non-EU taxable persons may have to register directly or possibly through an agent or may have to appoint a
fiscal representative (see paragraph 1.4).

L EU companies and non-EU companies established in a country having a legal instrument on mutual
assistance with France should register directly or through a tax agent via the Electronic Business
Formalities Counter (Guichet unique) (https:///ormalites. entreprises. gouvfr/) and enclose the
following documents online:

+ power of attorney designating the tax agent, if any, and signed by a person who is duly entitled to
represent the non-resident taxable person (a copy of the power of attorney is sufficient);

+ proof of identity (front/back) of the representative of the agent with handwritten mention of
attestation on honor of conformity to the original, dated and signed;

+ a copy of the articles of association or by-laws of the taxable person in its original language;

= unofficial translation into French of main items (legal form, partners, manager, registered capital,
corporate purpose). If the articles of association are written in a language of a non-EU country, the
tax authorities can request a sworn translation;

+ a copy of the passport or identity card of the person(s) who sign(s) the registration form for sole
proprietorships only (unless the registration is made through a VAT agent);

+ certificate of VAT liability, if applicable, in the country in which the company has its registered
office or principal place of business; and

+ anexcerpt from the Trade Register of the taxable person or equivalent in its country of
establishment (recommended).

In some cases, the foreign taxable person must also provide a contract, estimate, invoice or any other
document proving existence of his business in France.

2. Non-EU taxable persons established in a country having no legal instrument of mutual assistance with
France should register through the appointment of a tax representative.

Before applying for a VAT registration, the appointed fiscal representative must be first accredited by its local
tax office (see also paragraph 1.4).

The VAT registration application is then submitted via the Electronic Business Formalities Counter (Guichet
unique) (Attps://formalites.entreprises. gouy,fr/). The same documents as listed in above section for EU
companies and non-EU companies established in a country having a legal instrument on mutual assistance
with France are required.

‘The French Tax Authorities usually take from several days up to 2 months to issue a French VAT
identification number. A retroactive VAT registration is only possible in France in certain cases and upon
acceptance by the authorities.

13 VAT grouping

13.1 VAT Group

The optional VAT grouping regime (“assujetti unique” in French) based on Article 256 C of the VAT code
(transposing Article 11 of the EU VAT directive) is only reserved to members established in France (fixed
establishments located abroad are excluded) or fixed establishments in France of foreign companies, which
are linked from a financial, economic or organisational standpoint.

204 | France

--- Page 21 ---
Option must be made by 31 October of the preceding year and will last at least 3 years with the same
perimeter, Then additions and the exit must be declared by 31 October of the preceding year. The list of
members must be notified by 31 January each year.

Members will lose their independent status of taxpayer as the group is the unique taxable person with a
specific VAT number. Members are defined as sectors of activity (notably for options for taxation in the
financial sector) and remain jointly liable for the payment of the tax

‘There is no specific rule regarding the supplies among group members. ‘The rules applying to operations
between totally distinct taxable persons also apply to supplies among group members. Pure holding
companies cannot make part of the VAT group.

13.2 VAT consolidation

France implemented an optional VAT consolidation regime. It only allows pooling the debit/credit VAT
positions of the companies belonging to the group in order to provide a cash advantage.

The application of such regime is subject to the following cumulative conditions:

+ each member of the group, including the head taxable person, must file electronic corporate tax returns
to the “Direction des Grandes Entreprises” (DGE) which are the relevant authorities for large companies
(with a turnover exceeding EUR 400,000,000). Non-established taxable persons carrying out taxable
operations and having appointed a fiscal representative in France cannot be affiliated to the DGE even if
the fiscal representative is affiliated to the DGE;

the VAT consolidation regime in France is an option whereby each member must elect to participate in
the VAT consolidation group. The option is applied by the head taxable person after having received the
express agreement of the members to participate in the VAT consolidation group. The option takes effect
as of the first day of the first following accounting period and must be made prior to the beginning of this
accounting period;

+ the head taxable person must hold at least 50% of the capital or voting rights of each member. This
holding must be continuous over the period covered by the option;

* the accounting periods of the members must start and end on the same dates; and

+ the members must be registered under the same VAT regime (“régime réel normal”) and file monthly VAT
returns.

If one of the above-mentioned conditions is not met, the VAT consolidation regime ceases to apply. Under the

VAT consolidation regime, the following rules apply:

+ each member of the group, including the head taxable person, has its own VAT registration number and
must file its own periodical VAT return. The members are, however, relieved from the payment of VAT, if
any. Also, a VAT credit incurred by a member during the period of application of the VAT consolidation
regime cannot be carried over on the next VAT return of the said member. The VAT credit can only be
used by the head taxable person as stated below; and

* the head taxable person of the VAT consolidation group aggregates the VAT debts and VAT credits
incurred by each member of the group, i.e. the head taxable person files, in addition to its own VAT
return, a single VAT return on a monthly basis stating the balance between alll tax due and all tax credits
generated by the members of the group. If the balance is positive, the head taxable person must pay the
VAT due. If the balance is negative, the head taxable person can either carry forward this VAT credit to the
next single VAT retum or ask for its refund.

Although the liable entity of the VAT consolidation group towards the French authorities is the head taxable
person, each member remains jointly liable for payment of VAT and corresponding penalties, if any.

‘There is no specific rule regarding the supplies among group members. The rules applying to operations
between totally distinct taxable persons also apply to supplies among group members.

France | 205

--- Page 22 ---
L4 Fiscal representative

Non-EU established taxable persons must VAT register by appointing a tax representative duly accredited

by the French tax administration. The representative is personally liable for the payment of VAT to the
French tax administration. The accreditation process takes into consideration the fiscal morality, the technical
capacity and the financial solvency of the tax representative.

This obligation to appoint a tax representative in France is waived for non-EU taxable persons which are
established in countries with which France has a legal instrument of mutual assistance similar in scope to that
laid down by EU law (Directive 2010/24/BU dated 16 March 2010 and Council Regulation Nr. 904/2010 of 7
October 2010).

The list of those countries is stated in a Ministerial Order dated 16 February 2021 (entry into force on 27
February 2021):
+ Antigua and Barbuda

» Armenia
» Aruba
+ Australia

+ Azerbaijan
+ Bosnia and Herzegovina

+ Cape Verde
+ Cook Islands
+ Curagao

+ Dominica
+ Ecuador

+ Faroe Istands
+ French Polynesia

+ Georgia

+ Ghana

+ Granada

+ Greenland

+ India

+ Iceland

+ Jamaica

+ Japan

+ Kenya

+ Kuwait

+ Mauritius

+ Mexico

+ Moldova

+ Nauru

+ New Zealand
+ Niue

+ North Macedonia
+ Notway

+ Pakistan

+ Republic of Korea
+ Saint Barthélemy
+ Saint Martin

+ Sint Maarten

* South Africa

+ Tunisia

+ Turkey

* Ukraine

+ United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
* Vanuatu

206 | France

--- Page 23 ---
Non-EU taxable persons established in a country mentioned in this list must VAT register under the same
procedure as EU taxable persons.

The appointment of a fiscal representative is also required in the frame of the 13" Directive VAT refund
procedure for all non-EU companies.

As of | January 2019, non-EU taxable persons (except those established in the countries listed in above-
mentioned Ministerial Order dated 16 February 2021) are compelled to designate a single and unique fiscal
representative for the reporting and obligations of all taxes referred to in Article 302 decies of the VAT Code
(VAT, WHT etc.).

15 Limited fiscal representative/ Agent

The limited fiscal representative ceased to exist as of 31/12/2024.

The limited fiscal agent regime for foreign companies with no obligation to appoint a fiscal representative is
maintained.

A limited fiscal representative (“Mandataire fiscal ponctue!”) can be appointed by EU taxable persons (and
those established in the countries listed in above-mentioned Ministerial Order dated 16 February 2021)
performing exclusively the following operations for which no VAT is due:
the release of goods from a customs or VAT warehouse, when the goods are immediately followed by an
export or an exempt intra-Community supply (Article 277-A- II-4 of the VAT Code); and
* imports of goods which are immediately followed by an exempt intra-Community supply after customs
clearance (Article 291-III-4° of the VAT Code; customs regime 4200).

The limited fiscal agent must be established and VAT registered in France. It must be accredited by the tax
office for foreign residents (DINR).

A non-EU taxable person can appoint different limited tax representatives for each of the above-mentioned
transactions (e.g. when they are performed in different places).

The limited fiscal representative is granted a specific VAT number dedicated to the above-mentioned
operations performed by all non-EU taxable persons he may represent. He must file a quarterly return to the
tax office for foreign residents (DINR) including all the operations performed by the EU taxable persons he
represents, as well as monthly Intrastat returns and European sales listings,

1.6 New Mandataire regime for imports

This regime is implemented as from | January 2025.
This regime is implemented in France since 01/01/2025 (Art. 289 A bis of the French tax code)

A company which is not established nor VAT identified in France can appoint one or more Mandataires

(‘agents’) who will take care of its import VAT obligations (filing returns, payments, VAT recovery or refund,

keeping ledgers). This regime applies when the sole operations carried out by this business are:

- imports for which VAT is fully deductible;

- transactions on goods with third countries on which VAT does not apply (zero-rated, exempt from
payment or suspended), referred to in new Article 95 ter of annex IIT to the French tax code.

‘The Mandataire must meet all the conditions below:

- He must be established in and VAT identified in France since at least | year and be accredited as
Mandataire by its tax office.

- He must not have committed, himself or his manager(s) in the case of a legal entity, serious or repeated
breaches of tax provisions, nor have been sanctioned for a management error that contributed to a
shortfall in assets or for personal bankruptcy, nor have been prohibited from managing the company

France | 207

--- Page 24 ---
for the previous three years, nor be subject to a management prohibition order in the process of being
enforced, He must have filed for at least ! year periodical VAT returns.

- He has a written mandate from the foreign company, specifying the period of application and the
conditions under which the principal entrusts goods in France to the Mandataire.

- The goods must be consigned to the Mandataire in the frame of an agreement for a consignment-stock,
work on goods, assembly, processing, renting, storage, or transit to another territory than France.

‘The Mandataire bears all the obligations (filing, payment, ledgers) on the transactions declared for the foreign
company. He is personally liable for any tax or penalties due. He must keep a registry of the operations
performed by the foreign company.

Under this regime, the foreign company operates in France under the specific global VAT number that is
assigned to its Mandataire. The foreign business does not need to get its own French VAT number,

The Mandataire will have 2 separate VAT filing obligations, one under its standard French VAT registration
for its own operations, the other one under its global VAT number as Mandataire for the operations performed
by the foreign company.

2. Taxable transactions

21 ‘Transfer of business

France implemented the option to not tax the transfer ofa going concern, as provided for in Article 257 bis of
the VAT Code.

The French official documentation states that the notion of a transfer of a going concern should be interpreted
in the light of the EC] Case Law. This notion represents “the transfer of a business or an independent part of
a business, including tangible elements and, if necessary, intangible elements which, together, constitute a
business or part of it capable of carrying on an autonomous economic activity.” The transfer of going concern
does not cover the transfer of goods and services made in favour of a taxable person who does not want to
operate the business and who will immediately liquidate the business concerned. This is the case when there
is a simple transfer of assets without any transfer of business or restructuring.

Also regarded as transfer of a totality of assets or part thereof, is the transfer of part of the assets, for example,
during the restructuring of a group (provision of a complete industry, including complete industry composed
of all the elements invested in a division of the company which is technically an independent business, that

is to say an entity capable of functioning by its own means under conditions qualified as normal in the sector
concerned).

When the transfer takes place between two taxable persons, this transfer is outside the svope of VAT (Article
257 bis of the VAT Code). In this situation, the transferee is regarded as the successor of the transferor
regarding the adjustments of input VAT on capital goods which may be necessary in the future. As a
consequence, this condition of being the successor in case of future regularizations implies that the transferee
is a taxable person VAT identified in France.

The transferor and transferee must declare this transaction in their French VAT retum on line E2 “Autres
opérations non imposables” (“Other non-taxable operations”).

According to the second paragraph of Article 257 bis of the VAT Code, the transfers, for VAT purposes,

implied by the membership or withdrawal of a taxable person as a member of a VAT group in accordance
with Article 256 C of the VAT Code, also benefit from the provisions of this article

208 | France

--- Page 25 ---
2.2 Supplies free of charge

- Gifts of small value

The supply of goods as gifts for which VAT was deducted upon acquisition or manufacture does not give rise

to a taxable operation/self-supply when the following two conditions are simultaneously met:

+ the value of the goods offered must not exceed the amount set by Article 23 N of Annex IV to the VAT
Code per object and per year for the same beneficiary (in 2025, the amount is EUR 73 tax included, the
amount will be updated from January 2026);

+ the application of goods is done for business purposes. If this is not the case, the self-supply is taxable
regardless of the value of the good provided as a gift (for example, withdrawal for the private needs of a
manager).

When these conditions are met, the right of deduction initially exercised, remains.
- Samples

Samples or specimens taken for business purposes do not give rise to taxation for self-supplies, nor to the
challenge of the deduction of the tax charged on these goods, whatever their value.

The French administration provides a stricter definition of the goods concerned compared to the ECJ.

According to the French tax administration guidance, samples are small quantities of goods intended to give
an idea of the products available on the market, which are given free of charge to potential customers in a
packaging different from that of the products marketed, which makes them unfit for sale. Thus, in the field
of perfumery and cosmetics, a good constitutes a sample if its capacity is small (for example, between 2 ml
and 10 ml) and if it bears the notice “not for sale”. The provision of a good free of charge which does not
correspond to this definition triggers a self-supply, subject to the rules applicable to gifts (see above), and the
tax payable is not deductible.

‘The French administration applies the same rules to “specimen” products, i.e. goods identical to the goods
marketed, distributed in limited numbers to certain people who are able. because of their professional activity,
to make them known to the public. Provided that the word “specimen” is clearly and indelibly affixed to the
product, it is mentioned “not for sale” and that the number of similar specimens given free of charge by a
company to the same person is justified (with regard to specimen discs and cassettes, professionals can thus
distribute to the same radio station or television channel up to five copies of the same recording per year, and
a single copy for other categories of beneficiaries: music critics, specialized magazines, discotheques), the
distribution of specimens does not trigger a self-supply. Distributing companies must keep a list of recipients
of the specimen which mentions the commercial quality of the latter.

2.3. Importation

2.3.1 Importation followed by an intra-Community supply

It is possible to apply an exemption for the VAT on importation when the importation is followed by
immediate intra-Community supplies or transfers which can be qualified as deemed intra-Community
supplies. The customs regime “4200” should be used.

In order to apply the regime 4200, the taxable person must be VAT registered in France.

EU taxable persons and non-EU taxable persons exempt from tax representation can appoint a limited fiscal
agent.

France | 209

--- Page 26 ---
2.3.2. Postponed accounting on importation

This regime is compulsory.
As from 1 January 2022, the import VAT is deferred to the VAT return and is declared and paid to the tax
authorities instead of to Customs.

Tt applies to any business importing goods into France.
For foreign companies, obtaining a VAT number prior to carrying out imports is an obligation.

The postponed accounting takes the form of a deferment on the VAT return called “reverse charge on import”
in France. The VAT return is in principle prefilled with the elements declared to Customs on the import
documentation (VAT number of the importer for VAT purposes).

3. Place of supply

3A Consignment and call-off stock

A call-off stock transaction refers to the situation whereby a supplier sends goods to a stock in another EU
Member State for an already known intended acquirer, the transfer of ownership of these goods to that
acquirer being postponed to a further event in the destination state when the acquirer takes out the goods from
the call-off stock.

If certain conditions are met, the supplier does not perform a transfer of own goods followed by a domestic
supply, but an intra-Community supply to his customer.

This simplification must be used if all the conditions are fulfilled. The former VAT simplification arrangement
implemented by the French tax authorities, which was applicable as an option, is therefore no longer in force
since | January 2020.

The French VAT legislation is generally in line with the articles introduced in the EU VAT Directive.

3.2 _ Installation supplies

Certain construction and installation supplies are treated as supplied where they are constructed or installed.

Article 258 Ib of the VAT Code states:
“The place of supply of movable goods is located in France when the good is in France during assembly or
installation by the vendor or on his behalf”.

When the goods are assembled or installed in France before the delivery takes place, the operation qualifies as.
a supply of goods taxable in France and not as a supply of services. The reverse charge applies if the customer
is registered for VAT purposes in France (whether he is established or not) and the supplier is not established
in France, even if he is registered for VAT in France (see also paragraph 8.1.1).

3.3 Distance sales threshold

From 2021, the rules and thresholds for distance sales (both intra~Community distance sales and distance
sales of imported goods) have been harmonized across the EU.

‘The yearly distance selling threshold for sales to customers in other EU Member States without a VAT
registration number (e.g. private individuals or PBRD) is now BUR 10,000 for intra-Community distance
sales. Tumover generated ftom the supply of ‘electronically supplied services’, telecommunication
services and broadcasting services are included in the EUR 10,000 threshold. A threshold of EUR 150 per
consignment applies for the application of the special scheme for distance sales of imported goods

210 | France

--- Page 27 ---
3.4 Simplified triangulation rules

Under the French VAT legislation, the simplified triangulation rules apply when the following conditions are
met:

(a) if France is EU Member State of arrival of the goods;
+ the middleman must neither be established in France nor registered for VAT purposes in France;

(b) if France is the Member State of middleman B (B is using its French VAT number);
+ the middleman must be established or VAT identified in France. He must not be established in the EU
Member State of arrival.

The French tax administration guidance has been amended further to the ECJ decision C-580/16, Firma Hans
Bihler mentioning that the simplification cannot be applied when B, established in the EU, is identified for
VAT in several EU Member States and uses for the acquisition in question the VAT identification number
issued by the EU Member State of dispatch or arrival of goods.

However, the paragraph in the French tax administration guidance which concerns France as the country of
arrival of the goods, still mentions that the middleman must not be established or identified in France and
must not have appointed a representative there in application of | of Article 289 A of the VAT Code. Article
258 D of the VAT code still mentions this condition and it has not been amended.

3.5 Acquisition threshold

The threshold for the intra-Community acquisitions of goods by non-taxable legal persons, taxable persons
engaged only in activities not giving rise to VAT deduction and flat-rate farmers is EUR 10,000 per year.
Below this threshotd, the intra-Community acquisitions are not subject to VAT,

However, the following transactions are subject to VAT in any case: intra-Community acquisitions of new
means of transport and intra-Commumity acquisitions of products subject to excise duties (tobacco, alcohol
and mineral oils).

All intra-Community acquisitions made by these persons must be taken into consideration for the calculation
of the threshold. The threshold can only apply when it has not been exceeded during the previous year.

3.6 __ Effective use and enjoyment

France has implemented the use and enjoyment rule of Article 59a of the EU VAT Directive under Article 259
C of the VAT Code but only in respect of certain type of B2C services. There are also certain B2B services
falling under the Use and Enjoyment rules. However, they have not been implemented in the VAT Code.

Article 259 C 1° of the VAT Code provides that for services other than those referred to in Articles 259
A (except those considered at 259 A-1°-c) and 259 D of the VAT Code, the place of supply of services is
deemed to be located in France when the services:

+ are supplied to non-taxable persons established, domiciled or habitually resident in an EU Member State;
+ are supplied by a supplier who has established his business or has a fixed establishment from which
the services are provided outside the EU or, in the absence of such place of establishment or fixed
establishment, is domiciled or habitually resident outside the EU; and
+ are effectively used and enjoyed in France.

The use and enjoyment rule of Article 259 C 1° of the VAT Code does not apply to the following services:

+ transport of goods, including intra-Community transports and accessories for these transport services;
+ transport of passengers:
+ expertise or work on movable property;
+ _ services provided by intermediaries acting in the name of and for the account of others;
+ rentals of means of transport, with the exception of long-term rentals of pleasure boats;
France | 211

--- Page 28 ---
+ services connected with immovable property;

+ cultural services, artistic, sporting, scientific, educational, entertainment or similar activities such as fairs
and exhibitions, including the services of the organizers of such activities, as well as services incidental to
these activities;

+ sales for consumption on the premises;

+ the single supplies of travel agencies:

+ services provided by electronic means;

+ telecommunications services; and

+ radio and television broadcasting services.

In addition, Article 259 C 2° of the VAT Code provides that rental of means of transport other than short-
term rental supplied to non-taxable persons established or domiciled or habitually resident outside the EU,
is taxable in France when the means of transport is effectively used in France, regardless of the place of
establishment of the supplier.

Article 259 C 2° of the VAT Code is not applicable to rental other than short term of pleasure boats if the boat is
actually made available to the customer in another EU Member State where the supplier has established his busi-
ness or has a permanent establishment from which the services are provided, even if the boat is used in France.

Finally, 3° of Article 259 C of the VAT Code provides thal the rental of movable property, other than means of
transport, to a non-taxable person established or having his domicile or habitual residence outside the EU, is
taxable in France if the rented movable property is actually used in France.

The criteria of use and enjoyment take into account the nature of each service referred to in Article 259 C of
the VAT Code.

In the French tax administration guidance, for example, the following B2C services are regarded as located in

France if effectively enjoyed and used in France:

+ advertisements when the location from which the advertising messages are transmitted to the target
audience is located in France, that is to say, in particular as part of a billboard advertising campaign, if the
advertising panels are located in France, or as part of a press campaign if the written media is distributed
primarily in France, or as part of an audiovisual campaign, if the media broadcasts to the French public;

+ long-term hiring out of means of transport for the distance covered in France; and

+ leased movable property when made available to the lessee in France.

The services supplied by a supplier established in France to non-taxable local public entities established
outside the EU should normally be taxable in France under the general B2C rule, However, the French tax
administration guidance mentions that these services must be considered as being located outside the EU.
since the use of the services is located on the territory of these entities.

Long-term hiring out of means of transport other than pleasure boats is taxable in France when:

+ the customer is established in France, no matter the place of establishment of the supplier and the place of
use of the service; or

+ the customer is established outside the EU and the service is used in France, no maiter the place of
establishment of the supplier.

The use and enjoyment rule of Article 59a(a) is also implemented for certain B2B services, not by the VAT

Code but by the French tax administration guidance. The following B2B services supplied to a taxable person

established in France are not subject to French VAT if effectively used or enjoyed outside the EU:

* — transport of goods and related commissions:

* conveying of means of transport for the purposes of transport of goods;

+ leasing of vehicles and materials for the purposes of transport of goods;

+ — storage, handling, loading and unloading of goods; and

+ repair, transformation, adaptation or processing services when such services concern goods which were
subject to VAT at the time of importation or re-importation by application of the paragraph | of Article
292 or of Article 293 of the VAT Law (in case of outward processing performed outside the EU).

212 | France

--- Page 29 ---
In practice, the following criteria may be observed

+ the distance covered outside the EU, as far as transport of goods and the conveying of means of transport
are concerned;

+ the distance covered outside the EU, as far as rental of vehicles and materials and commissions related to
transport are concerned; and

+ where the services are materially carried out, as far as guarding, warehousing, handling, loading and
unloading are concerned.

4. Chargeable event & chargeability of VAT

4.1 Principles

In the case of a supply of goods, the chargeable event occurs when the power to dispose of the goods as an
‘owner is transferred. As soon as the transfer of the power to dispose of the goods as an owner takes place, in
other words, as soon as the tangible personal property enters into the power and possession of the purchaser,
VAT becomes due, regardless of when the transaction is paid. In general, the rules of private law must be
applied. The transfer of the power to dispose of property as an owner generally occurs when consent is
exchanged, even if the property has not been delivered or the price has not been paid.

However, the parties may delay the formation of the contract and thus the transfer of ownership by including

a condition precedent in the contract. In this case, the transfer of ownership only takes place when the

condition is fulfilled. This type of clause must be distinguished from a resolutory condition in which

the transfer of ownership occurs at the time of the conclusion of the contract, which can be terminated

retroactively if the condition is fulfilled. The tax consequences are as follows:

+ in the case of a sale under suspensive condition, the taxable and chargeable event occurs only when the
condition is fulfilled;

«+ in the case of a sale subject to a resolutory condition, the taxable and chargeable event occurs as soon as
the consents are exchanged.

In the case of intra~-Community transactions, VAT becomes due at the latest on the 15" of the month following
the one during which the chargeable event occurred, i.e. the supply took place. VAT is however due on

the date of issue of the invoice provided that this date precedes the chargeability rule supra (i.e. 15" of the
month following the one during which the chargeable event occurred) and that it is not an advanced payment
invoice.

In the case of a supply of a service which falls under the main rule of Article 44 of the EU VAT Directive,
VAT is due at the time the chargeable event occurs. The chargeable event occurs at the time the service is
rendered.

In the case of a supply of a domestic service which does not fall under the main rule of Article 44 of the EU
VAT Directive, VAT is due at the time of collection date, in practice, the collection date is the date on which
the payment for the services is made by the purchaser to the supplier.

For any type of services rendered, the tax is payable, as a rule, upon the receipt of advance payments, price,
remuneration.

42 Advance payments

There used to be a distinction between advance payments received for goods and for services.

In the case of advance payments received for the supply of goods, prior to 1 January 2023, there was no
chargeable nor taxable event, unless it was contractually agreed that a transfer of title occurred as and when
an advance payment invoice was issued or received. From | January 2023, VAT is due at the time of receipt

of these advance payments up to the amount received. This rule applies automatically to advance payments
collected from 1 January 2023 on all contracts in progress on this date.

France | 213

--- Page 30 ---
In the case of advance payments before services are supplied, VAT is due at the time of receipt of these
advance payments.

4.3 Continuous supplies

In the case of continuous supplics of goods giving rise to successive statements or payments, up to the value
covered by these statements, VAT is due on the last day of each period to which the statements or payments
relate, or at the time of the invoice if the supplier opts for the payment of VAT upon debits,

Services ongoing over a period of more than 1 year, that do not give rise to settlements or payments in

that period and for which the customer is liable to account for the VAT on the basis of Article 196 EU VAT
Directive, are regarded as being supplied on the expiry of each calendar year up to the time the provision of
the services ceases.

4.4 Cash accounting

As mentioned above, in the case of a supply of a domestic service which does not fall under the main rule of
Article 44 of the EU VAT Directive, VAT is due at the time of collection date, Suppliers can however choose
to opt for the payment of VAT upon debits, The debit option allows that persons who provide services for
which the tax is in principle due at the time of payment, may be authorized to pay the tax according to their
debils (thal is to say at the time of the registration of the corresponding amounts to the debit of the accounts
receivable). In practice, this corresponds to the invoice date, provided that the invoice date is not later than
the collection date. If the invoice date is later than the collection date, the collection date should be used. In
case advance-payments are received from the purchaser, the tax point remains the payment date, even if the
option upon debits has been exercised.

5. Taxable amount

5.1 Bad Debt Relief
In France, bad debt relief is available to taxable persons, provided that they prove by any means that the
amount not yet paid by the customer is definitively irrecoverable.

In practice, a debt is regarded as definitively bad debt at the moment the taxable person, having used legal
actions, enters the debt in a final charge account.

The taxable person must send to the customer a copy of the invoice disclosing a specific wording: “facture
demeurée impayée pour la somme de EUR... (prix net) et pour fa somme de EUR ... (TVA correspondante),
qui ne peut faire l'objet d’une deduction (Article 272 du Code Général des Impéts)” (“Unpaid invoice for
the amount of EUR... (price net of VAT) and for the amount of EUR... (VAT amount), for which the VAT
deduction is not allowed (Article 272 of the VAT Code)”).

The VAT paid on these invoices must be deducted before 31 December of the second year following the year
during which the debt became irrecoverable.

The VAT is declared on line 21 of the French VAT return.

5.2 Cash Discounts

‘The financial rebates in case of early payment (conditional discount) stated on invoices may be treated
according to different procedures:

1. The supplier can add a specific item on the invoice explaining that the VAT corresponding to the price
actually paid can be deducted by the customer:

214 | France

--- Page 31 ---
In this case, the customer would be entitled to deduct only the VAT relating to the price paid. The supplier
will pay the VAT on the price paid by the customer after discount. The additional statement can be for
example: “En cas d’escompte pour paiement sous 14 jours, celui-ci sera déduit de notre chiffre d’ affaires
taxable. Le montant de la TVA déductible doit étre diminué de la TVA sur l’escompte » (If discount for
payment within 14 days, it will be deducted from our taxable turnover. The amount of deductible VAT must
be reduced with the VAT on the discount). This specific mention allows the supplier to pay the VAT only on
the price effectively paid without issuing a corrective document.

2. The supplier can add a specific item explaining that he renounces offsetting VAT relating to the
discount offered:

In this case, the supplier must add on his invoice that the discount is net of tax, “escompte net de taxe”.
‘The supplier will pay the VAT on the price mentioned on the invoice and the customer will be entitled to
deduct the VAT mentioned on the invoice.

3. No specific item added by the supplier:

In this case, the supplier must pay the VAT on the total amount of the invoice when the VAT is due. The
customer can deduct the VAT on the total amount mentioned on the invoice.

If the customer met the requirement in order to benefit from the financial rebate, the supplier must issue a
credit note for the amount of the rebate. Accordingly, the supplier will be entitled to recover from the State
the amount of VAT mentioned on the credit note and correspondingly, the customer will have to repay the
VAT mentioned on the credit note to the State.

The above rules are applicable to suppliers of goods and suppliers of services who opted to pay the VAT upon
debits (ie. on the basis of the invoice date in practice).

When the supplier of services pays the VAT according to the common local rule, i.e. when the payments
are received (tax point for domestic services in France, other than those referred to in Art. 44 of the VAT
Directive and for which the customer established in another EU Member State has to reverse-charge VAT
there), he should normally only pay the VAT on the payment received. He would then apply one of the
procedures described in points 1 or 3 above to regularize the invoice issued.

53 Open Market Value

France has not implemented the option for Member States to use the ‘open market value’ as the taxable
amount for specific transactions.

5.4 Returnable Packaging

With regard to returnable packaging, the French tax administration guidance allows businesses to not include
the consideration received for the supply of returnable packaging in the taxable amount of the total supply,
provided that the VAT relating to the amount of the returnable packaging has not been invoiced and that the
packaging delivered to customers is returned within the time limit customary in the profession in question
This period may vary according to the nature of the marketed products and the capacity of the packaging.
Once this period has elapsed, the returnable packaging must be included in the taxable amount.

When returnable packaging is not returned and cannot be considered as ancillary to the good, it is considered
as sold at the consignment price and taxed according to its own regime.

6. VAT rates

6.1 Standard rate

The standard rate in France is 20%,

France | 215

--- Page 32 ---
6.2 Reduced rate

‘The reduced rate in France is 5.5% and applies for instance to:

+ foodstufiés intended for human consumption, products normally intended to be used in the preparation
of these foodstufiis and products normally used to supplement or replace these foodstuffs, except certain
products (some chocolates, sweets, alcoholic beverages etc.);

+ gas and electricity subscriptions under specific conditions;

+ certain live shows, except those where one usually consumes food and beverages;

+ access rights to video-games competition:

+ supply of heat produced by at least 50% from renewable energy;

* certain operations (supplies of housing and land) made under a social policy;

+ goods and services for disabled persons;

* — catering in school cafeteria;

* transactions, including the rental of books on any kind of physical media, including downloaded books;

+ — deliveries of works of art, collectors’ items or antiques under specific conditions;

* access rights to movie theaters and certain assignments of copyrights on cinematographic works, zoos;

+ works improving energy efficiency of housing as well as construction and renovation of social housing,
provided that the buildings are at least two years old (fuel and gas heaters excluded);

+ supply of accommodation and food in certain types of establishments (social residences and services etc.);

+ admission fees to sporting events;

+ feminine hygienic protection products:

+ male and female condoms,

+ certain live shows given in places where one usually consumes beverages (establishments affiliated to
Centre national de la musique) and to certain original musical performances in establishments where
beverages are optionally served:

+ self-tests for detection of human immunodeficiency virus and diabetes;

* collection and sorting of household wastes;

* certain installation and maintenance services for charging infrastructure for electric vehicles; and

+ the teaching and practice of horse riding, entertainment and demonstration activities for the purpose of
discovering the equestrian environment.

63 Intermediary rate

The 10% rate applies for instance on:

+ restaurants (except alcoholic beverages) and company restaurants;

+ certain takeaway or delivery of food prepared for immediate consumption;

+ hotel accommodation and campsites;

+ certain transactions and supplies related to social housing;

* certain construction and renovation works on buildings;

+ care in thermal establishments;

* passenger transport;

+ supplies of pharmaccutical and medical products for human consumption which are not subject to the
super reduced rate;

+ private TV subscription;

* certain shows, games and entertainments;

* certain sales of intellectual rights by authors and artists;

+ _ fertilisers and limestones amendments, controls, labels and pesticides for bio products;

* organic fertilizers issued from agriculture;

+ certain public services; and

* wood related products for heating and ornamental plants.

64 Super-reduced and zero rates

France applies a specific rate of 2.1% for instance on:
+ press publications, including online;

+ TV license fe
* specific medication and blood products;

216 | France

--- Page 33 ---
+ some theatrical and circus performances; and
+ live animals for butchery sold to non-taxable persons.

Other rates apply in overseas departments as well as in Corsica:

+ applicable rates in Corsica: 0.9%, 2.1%, 5.5%, 10%, 13%, 20%;

+ applicable rates in Overseas Departments (Martinique, Guadeloupe, La Réunion (territories of Mayotte
and Guyane are not subject to VAT): 1.05%, 1.75%, 2.1%, 8.5%

ids Exemptions

7.1 Exemptions with the right of deduction

The following supplies and services are VAT exempted with the right of deduction:

+ insurance operations, reinsurance and brokerage transactions on insurance and reinsurance when they
relate to the insured or reinsured domiciled or established outside the EU or to exports of goods;

+ banking and financial operations mentioned in points A to E of Article 261 C of the VAT Code when
rendered to persons domiciled or established outside the EU or relating to exports of goods;

* — exports and intra-Community supplies of goods;

+ goods supplied to travellers resident outside the EU under certain conditions and services supplied by tax
refund operators using the public platform;

+ the supply of services consisting in work on movable property acquired or imported to be subject to work
and dispatched or transported outside the BU by the service provider or the customer established outside
France or for their account;

+ deliveries, processing, repair, maintenance, chartering and hiring of:

+ commercial sea vessels used for navigation on the high seas;
+ vessels used for industrial activity on the high seas; and
+ vessels used for professional sea fishing; sea boats for rescue or assistance.

+ — deliveries, hire, repair and maintenance of objects intended to be incorporated in these boats or used for
their operation at sea, as well as gear and nets for sea fishing:

+ deliveries, processing, repair, maintenance, chartering and hiring of the aircraft used by airlines whose
services to or from abroad (including communities and overseas departments sea, excluding metropolitan
France), represent at least 80% of the services they operate;

+ — deliveries, hire, repair and maintenance of the objects intended to be incorporated in these aircraft or used
for their flight operations;

+ the supply of goods for provisioning of vessels and aircraft designated above, as well as warships, as
defined in 89-01 subheading of the Common Customs Tariff, excluding vessels used for inshore fishing;

+ the supply of services to meet the direct needs of the vessels or aircraft designated above and their
cargoes;

+ air and sea passenger transport to and from foreign destinations or communities and overseas
departments;

+ rail passenger transport to and from foreign destinations, as well as transport of passengers by
international trains and on relations including certain routes (the list is determined by joint order of the
Minister for the Budget and the Minister of Transport);

+ road transport of foreign travellers coming to and from abroad, traveling in groups of at least 10 people;

* — transport between mainland France and Corsica for the part of the journey located outside the continental
territory:

+ transport of goods to and from Madeira and the Azores;

+ the supply of gold to the issuing institutions;

+ the supply of services relating to the importation of goods into France or another EU Member State whose
value is included in the importation tax base;

+ supplies of goods and services carried out within the framework of diplomatic and consular relations, for
the benefit of certain European organizations, including the EU, and for the armed forces;

+ the services supplied by travel agencies and tour operators for the portion relating to services performed
outside the European Community:

+ supplies of goods to taxable persons referred to in Article 256-V-2°-b of the VAT Code (taxable persons

France | 217

--- Page 34 ---
who facilitate, through the use of an electronic interface such as a marketplace, platform, portal or similar
device, the supply of goods within the EU by a taxable person not established within the EU, to a non-
taxable person);

» the services rendered by intermediaries acting in the name of and for the account of others when involved
in transactions exempt under Article 262 of the VAT Code as well as in transactions outside the territory
of the LU Member States (not applicable to travel agents and tour operators);

+ imports of goods previously under a suspension regime which have been subject lo one or more deliveries
referred to in 6 ° or 7 ° of I of Article 277 A of the VAT Code during their placement under the suspension
regime;

* in the event of a disaster affecting the territory of a Member State, imports of goods covered by an
authorization granted to France by a decision of the European Commission pursuant to the first paragraph
of Article 53 of Council Directive 2009/132/EC of October 19, 2009;

+ inthe event of a disaster affecting the territory of a Member State, the supply of goods and related
services, where the importation of such goods by the recipient would have been exempt pursuant to 2° bis
of II of Article 291 of the VAT Code;

+ supplies of services directly linked to the placement of a good under specific customs arrangements;

+ supplies made by a taxable person which are not taxable in France, to the extent they would trigger the
right to deduct input VAT if their place of taxation was in France;

* operations carried out by fishermen and shipowners, with the exception of freshwater fishermen,
concerning the sale of their fishery products (fish, crustaceans, shellfish, fresh or preserved fresh by a
refrigeration process); and

+ zero-rated supply of goods delivered to exporters who apply a VAT free purchase regime ‘Régime des
achats en franchise’ (see paragraph 7.4 below).

7.1.1 Intra-Community supplies

In order to prove the VAT exemption in case of intra-Community supplies, the following is required:

+ the supplier must obtain the EU VAT number of the customer. The supplier must check the validity of this
VAT number on the VIES website (Attp.//ec.europa.eu/taxationc_ ustoms/vies/);

+ the EU VAT number must be stated on the invoice;

+ the invoice must state the article referring to the VAT exemption of the intra-Community supply, i.e.
Article 262 ter [ of the VAT Code or Article 138 of the EU VAT Directive;

+ the supplier must file the recapitulative statement (European sales listing) referred to in Article 289 B-]
of the VAT Code; and the supplier must justify the reality of the dispatch or transport of goods outside
France. This can be done by any means:

* means of evidence may be direct or indirect;

+ all indications resulting from usual commercial documents that allow the supplier to prove for each
delivery, the existence of the dispatch or transport. The following documents may be provided as
proof: transport documents (CMR, AWB, sea bill of lading etc), carrier invoices, insurance for the
transport of the goods, contract with the customer, business correspondence, written order from the
customer, removal order, written confirmation from the customer about the receipt of the goods in
another EU Member State (tax entry certificate), duplicate of the supplier invoice stamped by the
customer, notice of settlement from a foreign bank, etc.

This list is not exhaustive and the overall value of justification submitted is assessed on a case-by-case basis.
Tn most cases, the French tax authorities will ask as main evidence for the transport, a document on which
the supplier is mentioned as sender and the signature of the customer for receipt of the goods in another EU

Member State is shown.

If the supplier estimates that it does not possess sufficient justi
existence of the dispatch or the transport, VAT must be charged.

12 documents enabling him to prove the

The above rules can still be used in order to prove the transport besides the presumptions of transport as
mentioned in Article 45a Implementing Regulation.

218 | France

--- Page 35 ---
7.1.2 Export supplies

In order to prove the VAT exemption in case of exports, the following is required:

+ the customs document issued by the customs authorities. The supplier, when established in the EU, must
appear on the export document as the exporter of record (box 2 “exportateur”) with his EORI number.
When established outside the EU, the supplier must appear in box 44 with his French VAT number (rule
in force in France since 01 October 2020); and

+ there must be a confirmation of exit of the European Union.

‘The export may also be proved by alternative means such as the authenticated customs declaration in the
country of import of the goods or the documents relating to the transport when this transport is outside the
EU. However, these other means of proof are generally not so easily accepted by the tax authorities.

7.1.3 Warehousing

7.1.3.1 VAT warehouse

France has introduced VAT warehouses for importation, exportation and processing, upon authorization.
Besides the products listed in Annex V of the EU VAT Directive, all non-Community goods or Community
goods coming from outside the fiscal territory of the Community, if they are allowed into a warehouse by the
EU customs legislation, can be placed in a VAT warehouse.

By tolerance, a non-established trader is not required to register for VAT when placing (except further to
intracommunity acquisitions) or selling goods in a VAT warehouse, or to another fiscal warehouse, but must
register for VAT when releasing goods from a VAT warehouse (if responsible for the release of the goods).
For a non-EU established trader who would have the obligation to appoint a fiscal representative, it is
tolerated that the warehouse keeper (owner of the license) provides its own VAT number to the foreign seller
It is possible to make use of a limited fiscal representative (see also paragraph 1.5).

An EU established trader must have a French VAT number to make an intra~Community acquisition of goods
destined to enter the fiscal warehouse.

If the goods are placed in a VAT warehouse, importation is provisionally exempt for VAT purposes. The sale
within the VAT warehouse is exempt from VAT. The VAT applies on the release from the VAT warehouse
unless a further exemption applies (e.g. in case of an intra-Community supply, exportation). In addition,

the reverse charge may apply if a non-established taxable person reteases the goods and sells the goods to a
French taxable person.

The warehouse keeper must take responsibility for compliance (including recording movements of the goods,
keeping an overview of the storage and discharging documents). Special invoicing requirements apply.

‘The warehouse keeper, the transporter of the goods where goods are shipped out of the VAT warchouse and
his principal are jointly and severally liable for any VAT due, together with the supplier and the customer.
7.1.3.2 Excise warehouse

Excise goods under suspension of excise duties can be stored in an excise warchouse. When a trader wishes
to receive goods under suspension of both VAT and excise duty, he must meet the conditions laid down in the
relevant legislation to benefit from both suspension arrangements.

7.13.3 Bonded warehouse

It is possible to store goods coming from outside the EU in a bonded warehouse before the importation
occurs.

This is subject to a prior authorization from the customs authorities which can be only granted to companies
established in the EU. The applicant must justify the economic need for using such a regime. The goods
subject to absolute prohibitions on importation under all types of customs regimes cannot be placed in a
bonded warehouse.

The sale of goods while still in bond is not subject to French VAT.
France | 219

--- Page 36 ---
In order for the supply of goods to be not subject to French VAT, the goods must be maintained under the
bonded regime under which they were originally placed. Taxable persons are required to indicate on their
invoices, issued in accordance with Article 289 of the VAT Code, the authorization number of the opening of
the customs regime as well as the name of the bonded warehouse license holder and of the warehouse keeper
when this is a distinct person.

When goods have not been subject to sale and they are still in bond, VAT is paid on the release either by the
recipient for supplies of goods or by the acquirer for intra-Community acquisitions.

For goods having been subject to a sale while in bond, VAT is paid on the release by the customer of the last
sale performed while the goods were bonded.

Certain services relating to bonded goods are also zero rated.
7.2 Exemptions without the right to deduction

721 Exemptions in the public interest

Certain operations subject to other specific taxes, operations on used goods under conditions, hospital
services, medical and paramedical care, ambulance services, educational services, services of a cultural or
social nature, supplies of land which is not building land within the meaning of Article 257 I-2-1° of the VAT
Code, supplies of buildings which have been built more than 5 years ago, supplies by public utility bodies
under conditions, ete.

7.2.2 Other exemptions

+ financial and banking:

+ the granting and the negotiation of credit, the management of credit by the person granting it, the
securities loans carried out in the conditions fixed under Articles L. 211-22 to L. 211-26 of the
monetary and financial code and the pensions carried out in the conditions fixed under Articles L211-
27 to L211-34 of the same code;

+ the negotiation of, or any dealings in, credit guarantees or any other security for money and the
management of credit guarantees by the person who is granting the credit;

+ transactions, including negotiation, concerning deposit and current accounts, payments, transfers,
debts, cheques and other negotiable instruments, but excluding debt collection:

* transactions, including negotiation, concerning currency, bank notes and coins used as legal tender,
with the exception of collectors’ items;

* transactions other than safekeeping or management, in shares, interests in companies or associations,
debentures and other securities, but excluding documents establishing title to goods and interests
equivalent to shares giving the holder thereof de jure or de facto rights of ownership or possession
over immovable property or part thereof;

+ the management of collective investment funds in transferable securities and debt investment funds of
1, 2 and 6 subsection 2, 2 or sub paragraph 1 1 of subsection 3 or of subsection 4 of section 2 chapter
IV Title I Book II of the monetary and financial code and of a special purpose vehicle (SPV);

* transactions relating to gold, other than gold for industrial purposes, when they are carried out by
financial institutions, suppliers of investment services, moneychangers, discounters and brokers or by
any other person who makes it his main activity;

+ insurance and reinsurance transactions, including related services performed by insurance brokers and
insurance agents; and

+ the supply at official value of fiscal stamps and postage stamps which are current or have a postage
value in France.

+ immovable property:

+ rentals of land and buildings for agricultural use;

+ property rental under a lease conferring a right in rem;

+ rentals of undeveloped land and bare premises, with the exception of sites for parking vehicles, but
these provisions are not applicable when the rental is a way for the landlord to continue in another
form the conduct of a business or extension/increase of its business/market asset or when the landlord
participates in the tenant company results;

220 | France

--- Page 37 ---
+ rentals or concessions rights to the property referred to in the 2 first points to the extent that they fall
within the management of property assets; and

* — occasional rentals, permanent or seasonal furnished accommodation or fitted for residential use.

* — others:

+ the organization of games of chance or gambling subject to a progressive levy referred to in Article
L 2333-56 of the General Code of Territorial Collectivities or the organization of games of chance or
gambling subject to tax on shows, games and entertainment; and

+ the product of the operation of the national lottery, national lotto, horse mutual bets, bets on sports
competitions and circle games online, with the exception of the remuneration received by the
organizers and intermediaries involved in the organization of these games and bets.

7.3 Option for taxation

731 Financial and banking
The option for taxation is possible for the following transactions:

+ financial and banking; and
«normally exempt transactions connected to banking, financial activities, and, generally speaking, to
securities and money business, such as these activities defined by decree.

Banking or financial transactions normally exempted from VAT can be subject to VAT by option, except when
they fall within the scope of one of the categories of transactions expressly excluded from the right of option
for taxation according to Article 260 B of the VAT Code.

Only certain operators can opt for the taxation, namely professionals of financial and banking business and
other persons usually carrying out transactions linked to banking and financial activities. The option takes the
form of a written declaration printed on the letterhead of the taxable person and takes effect as of the 1" day
of the month following the one during which the filing of the declaration to the local tax office of the place of
exercise of the profession has been made.

Each time a taxable person who has exercised the option, carries out a banking or financial transaction
falling within its scope, he can choose whether to subject it to tax or to exempt it. In practice, this option
may lead the taxpayer to decide, according to his own motivations, to apply the option not only transaction
by transaction, but also by category or type of transaction, or even, in a global approach, to apply it to all
banking or financial transactions falling within the scope of the option.

The option initially covers a period of 5 years, including the one during which the option is declared. It takes
effect from the first day of the month following the one during which the option is declared to the local tax
office.

The option may be terminated as from | January of the fifth year following the year in which it was exercised.
The termination takes effect from the first day of the month following the month in which itis filed with the
tax office.

7.3.2 Lease and sale of immovable property

Supplies of immovable property taxable upon option to tax are:

+ supplies of land which is not building land within the meaning of Article 257 12 1° of the VAT Code; and
+ supplies of buildings built for more than 5 years.

‘The option can generally take the form of a written declaration printed on the letterhead of the taxable person
sent to the relevant tax office, The property for which the option is made should be clearly identified in the
letter; some other conditions may exist depending on the immovable property concerned.

The option generally takes effect from the 1* day of the month following the one during which it has been
sent to the tax office.

France | 221

--- Page 38 ---
‘The duration of the option varies depending on the immovable property involved.
Regarding rentals of immovable property, the following supplies can be submitted to VAT upon option to tax are:

+ the landlord who rents unfurnished premises for the purposes of the business of a licensee who is a
taxable person, or if the lease is entered into on or after 31 December 1990, for the purposes of the
activity of a non-taxable person;

+ the landlord who rents property under a lease conferring a right in rem; and

+ the persons who rent land and buildings operating for agricultural use.

7.4 VAT free purchase regime

French VAT registered taxable persons performing intra-Community supplies and/or exports can purchase
or import goods free of VAT up to an amount corresponding to their intra~Community supplies and exports
of the previous year or the past 12 months, upon authorisation by the tax authorities. This quota is called
“contingent d’achats en franchise”. In order to benefit from this regime, the customer must provide its
supplier with a signed document certifying that the goods purchased are susceptible to be exported or
supplied to another EU Member State and making reference to the ‘achat en franchise’ license number
granted by the authorities.

When the quota is exceeded, the purchases made until the end of the year are subject to VAT unless an
extension of the quota is claimed. This VAT is recoverable under the general conditions.

8. Liability

8.1 Reverse charges

In France, there are several obligatory reverse charge rules besides the reverse charge for general B2B
services provided by foreign entities to taxable persons and legal entities established in France. This reverse
charge applies in all EU Member States and follows from Articles 44 and 196 EU VAT Directive.

8.
When taxable persons not established in France, invoice taxable persons registered for VAT purposes in
France for the domestic supply of goods or services, the French VAT due on the domestic transaction is
always shifted to the customer. The customer does not have to be established in France, but he must be VAT
registered in France in order for the reverse charge to apply. The customer self-assesses this VAT in its French
VAT return. The invoice issued does not show VAT.

1 General reverse charge mechanism — non-resident suppliers (Article 194 Directive)

The reverse charge mechanism is applicable when the supplier is not established in France. The reverse
charge even applies if the supplier is VAT registered in France.

On the invoice, reference should be made to the application of the reverse charge. The corresponding French
wording “Autoliquidation” is required on invoices subject to French invoicing rules. It is not compulsory
any more to refer to the VAT Code or to the EU VAT Directive provisions but for clarity purposes, a foreign
supplier could use the following text on the invoice: “Autoliquidation — Article 283-1 of CGI”.

8.1.2 Specific domestic reverse charges (Article 199 Directive)

On the following supplies and/or services, the domestic reverse charge rules apply to:

+ operations of recycling goods and the new wastes of industry when the customer has a French VAT number ;

+ supply of investment gold (optional) ;

+ supply of CO, Emission Rights, certificates of guarantee of origin of biogas, electricity, renewable gas
and hydrogen, certificates of production of biogas and certificates of guarantee on capacities (on the latter,
change expected);

* electronic communication services which are out of scope of the tax mentioned in Article L.453-1 of
tax code on goods and services (CIBS) when the supplier is established in France and the customer is
established and VAT registered in France;

222 | France

--- Page 39 ---
+ supply of natural gas and electricity:
+ — from non-resident suppliers to taxable dealers established and VAT registered in France;
+ — from non-resident suppliers to French VAT registered acquirers using the goods for final consumption
in France;
+ from French established suppliers to French VAT registered customers, when used for purposes other
than consumption.

+ services connected to immovable property and consisting in construction work, including repair, cleaning,
maintenance, transformation and demolition services are subject to the reverse charge by the contractor,
VAT registered in France, who subcontracts such services within the meaning of Article | of Law No. 75-
1334 of 31 December 1975.

8.2 Joint and several liability

Under the French VAT rules, joint and several liability exists:

+ for businesses that form part of a VAT group. The representative of the VAT group bears the responsibility
regarding the amounts of VAT, late interests and penalties due resulting from reassessment procedures
followed in respect of the different members of the group. However, each member of the group remains
jointly liable for the payment of VAT, penalties and late interests (if required) due by the VAT group, up to
the amount that each member would owe if it was not part of the group;

+ for the French tax representative in case of payment failure (voluntary or not) of VAT, late interests by the
represented foreign company; and

+ for the acquirer of a good or service who knew or could not have ignored that he was participating in
fraud involving this good or service, due to the tax not paid upstream by a defaulting supplier (notably in
case of carousel fraud).

Joint and several liability also exists in other situations where, for example, there is a supply involving online
platform operators, an intra-Community acquisition when the acquirer is not established in France etc.

9. Recovery of input VAT

Asa general rule, input VAT must be deducted on a VAT return by 31 December of the second year following
the tax point. A special statement is compulsory for late deductions.

1 Non-recoverable input VAT

In tn general, the input VAT is not recoverable in case of:
goods or services used for more than 90% for non-business purposes;
+ accommodation expenditures for managers and employees;
+ vehicles for transportation of persons;
* — transport of persons;
+ deliveries of goods without payment or for a too low price (gifts not meeting the VAT deductibility
conditions, mentioned in paragraph 2.2. ete.);
+ services related to excluded goods (maintenance services on vehicles for the transport of passengers, etc.);
+ prohibited adverts; and
+ oil products except in the following cases:
* in case of oil products in a gaseous form and kerosene when used as fuel by the final customer:
+ 50% of the input VAT is recoverable if used for vehicles excluded from the right to deduction
(transport of passengers ete.); and
+ 100% of the input VAT is recoverable if used for vehicles not excluded from the right to deduction
(public transport of passengers ete.).
* incase of petrol products (gasoline), diesel oil and super ethanol E85, when used as fuel by the final
customer:
* 80% of the input VAT is recoverable if used for vehicles excluded from the right to deduction
(transport of passengers etc.); and
+ 100% of the input VAT is recoverable if used for vehicles not excluded from the right to deduction
(public transport of passengers etc.).

France | 223

--- Page 40 ---
9.2 Excess input VAT

Excess input VAT on a VAT return (VAT credit) can be carried over indefinitely or voluntarily claimed back
ona monthly, quarterly or annual basis, The refund can be requested on a monthly or quarterly basis if the
VAT credit amount is at least EUR 760. The refund can be requested on an annual basis if the VAT credit
amount is at least EUR 150.

9.3. Adjustment periods

The beginning of the adjustment period is the year during which the property has been acquired, imported,
completed, used for the first time or transferred between different business sectors.

+ immovable property - 20 years (19 years following the year of first use)
+ movable property - 5 years (4 years following the year of first use)

The adjustment applies on asset value.

94 VAT refunds to EU taxable persons

EU taxable persons must file the refund request via the electronic portal of their EU Member State. The
requests must be filed before 30 September of the calendar year following the refund period.

The threshold for the refund is EUR 400 for a period of 3 months to a year and EUR 50 for a period of a
calendar year or the settlement of the calendar year.

An EU taxable person can file up to 4 quarterly refund claims (one for each quarter provided that the
minimum amount is met) and one yearly refund ctaim in case invoices were not included in the other refund
claims.

Copies of invoices or import documents for which the taxable amount equals or exceeds EUR 1,000 or EUR
250 for fuel costs must be submitted through the electronic portal together with the filing of the claim. If the size
limit is reached, the additional invoices can be, in principle, sent by email (st-tva.dinr@dgfip.finances.gouv.fr).

The tax authorities have 4 months to decide if they will refund the VAT or not (6 months in case of a first
request of additional information and 8 months in case of another request for additional information).

In case of a final decision of rejection, the time to appeal to the Administrative Court is 2 months from the
receipt of the decision extended by 2 additional months when the taxable person is established outside France.
In the meantime, the foreign taxable person can also make a claim to the tax conciliator at the following
address:

Le Conciliateur fiscal de la Direction des Impéts des Non-Résidents
10 rue du Centre

TSA 70025

93465 Noisy Le Grand Cedex

France

conciliateurfiscaldinr@dgfip,finances.gou,fr

There is no specific time limit to make an appeal to the tax conciliator.
The same VAT deduction limitations apply as for French taxable persons (see also paragraph 9.1).

95 VAT refunds to non-EU taxable persons

In practice, the French authorities do not make the refunds conditional upon the granting by third States of
comparable advantages regarding turnover taxes.

224 | France

--- Page 41 ---
According to the 13" Directive procedure, non-EU taxable persons must appoint a fiscal representative who
sends their refund requests to the VAT Refund Department.

‘The refund claim must be transmitted electronically.

Asummary table showing all the invoices or import documents justifying the amount of reimbursement
requested can be completed online or must be attached to the request.

‘The request must also be accompanied by a copy of invoices or import documents when the tax base
appearing on these invoices or documents is equal to or greater than an amount of EUR 1,000, or EUR 250 if.
the invoice relates to fuel expenses.

‘The minimum threshold is EUR 400 for the quarterly requests and EUR 50 for the yearly requests. The
requests can be filled in and sent during the month following the relevant period.

‘They must be sent before the end of the 6" month following the calendar year during which the VAT to be
refunded became due, i.e. 30 June of the following year.

In principle, a non-EU taxable person can file up to 4 quarterly refund claims (one for each quarter provided
that the minimum amount is met) and one yearly refund claim in case invoices were not included in the other
refund claims. Non-EU companies must appoint a tax representative specifically authorized for the 13 EU
Directive VAT refund procedure (see also paragraph 1.4).

The tax authorities have 6 months to decide if they will refund the VAT or not. A delay may exceptionally be

increased to 9 months after additional information has been asked and received from the claimant. In case of

a final decision of rejection, the time to appeal to the Administrative Court is 2 months from the receipt of the
decision extended by 2 additional months since the taxable person is established outside France.

In the meantime, the foreign taxable person can also make a claim to the tax conciliator at the following address:

Le Conciliateur fiscal de la Direction des Impéts des Non-Résidents
10 rue du Centre

TSA 70025

93465 Noisy Le Grand Cedex

France

conciliatewfiscaldiny @dgfip.finances.gouv fr

‘There is no specific time limit to make an appeal to the tax conciliator.
‘The same VAT deduction limitations apply as for French taxable persons (see also paragraph 9.1).
More information on the VAT refund procedure for EU and non-EU taxable persons can be found at the

following website link: Attps://tinyurl.com/5n8xzb9r

10. Administrative obligations

10.1 Invoices

10.1.1 Invoice content

French invoicing rules apply to:

+ transactions carried out on the French territory or deemed so in application of Articles 258, 258B, 259,
259A, 259C and 259D of the VAT Code, excluding transactions carried out by a taxable person who has,
in another EU Member State, the seat of his economic activity or a fixed establishment from which the
transaction is performed, and for which the acquirer or recipient is liable for the VAT payment, except if the
taxable person gave the latter a mandate to issue invoices in his name and on his behalf (self-invoicing);

France | 225

--- Page 42 ---
* transactions for which the place of taxation is located in another EU Member State and which are carried
out by a taxable person who has, in France, the seat of its economic activity or a fixed establishment from
which the transaction is performed, and for which the acquirer or recipient is liable for the VAT payment
in the EU Member State in which the transaction is located, except if the taxable person gave the latter a
mandate to issue invoices in his name and on his behalf (self- invoicing); and

+ transactions whose place of taxation is located outside the BU and which are carried out by a taxable
person who has, in France, the seat of ils economic activity or a fixed establishment from which the
transaction is performed.

A VAT invoice must contain the following information:
+ date at which the invoice is issued;
+ invoice number (sequential and chronological);
+ VAT identification number under which the supply of goods or services is performed
+ VAT identification number of the supplier and VAI identification number of the customer in case of an
intracommunity supply;
+ VAT identification of the supplier and of the customer for supplies of goods or services subject to reverse
charge except article 194 of the EU Directive;
+ name and address of the supplier or service provider;
+ name and address of the customer;
+ billing address if it is different from the official addresses of the parties (e.g. ‘sold-to’ different than ‘bill-
to’);
+ purchase order number when it has been previously established by the buyer;
+ — operation’s date if it differs from the date of the invoice;
+ quantity and description of the goods or services;
* unit price without VAT;
+ reduction and discount directly related to the operation;
+ applicable VAT rate or exemption;
+ the total VAT amount, and for each rate, the total amount without VAT and the relating VAT;
+ reduction and discount not related to particular operations;
+ the reference to the relevant Article of the VAT Code or of the EU VAT Directive or to other information
indicating that the operation is exempted;
+ the indication for which the acquirer or recipient is liable for the payment of VAT (intra-Community or
domestic operations):
+ all the above-mentioned information, except as a simplification, for invoices for which the customer
established in another EU Member State must account for reverse charge VAT, the unit price without
VAT, the applicable VAT rate, the VAT amount and any reduction of price or discount; and
+ the mentioning of “Autoliquidation” (reverse charge). The administration does not require any longer the
mentioning of the provisions of the VAT Code or of EU VAT Directive justifying the application of such
regime but does neither prohibit it. It is recommended to include “Autoliquidation” with the reference to
the corresponding provisions to avoid any confusion regarding the nature of the transaction;
+ — the information necessary to determine whether there is a new means of transport; and
* areference to the fact that a margin scheme has been applied as well as a reference as to why the margin
scheme applied, e.g.:
+ margin scheme — second hand goods “Régime particulier — Biens d’ occasions”;
+ margin scheme — works of art “Régime particulier — Objets d’art”;
+ margin scheme — collector’s items and antiques “Régime particulier — Objets de collection et
d’antiquités”; and
+ tour operator margin scheme “Régime particulier - Agence de voyages”.

New invoicing requirements will enter into force from 1 September 2026:

+ SIREN number of the seller and the customer (if he has one);

+ delivery address if different from the billing address;

+ “VAT on debits” (if the supplier opted for the payment of VAT upon debits, i.e. in practice from the date
of issuance of the invoice). This mention will become mandatory while it is currently only recommended;
and

+ nature of the operation: delivery of goods and/or services.

226 | France

--- Page 43 ---
As a simplification, the following invoicing requirements are not compulsory on invoices with a net amount

of up to EUR 150 and corrective invoices modifying initial invoices when they referred to:

+ the VAT number of the taxable person under which he performed the supply of goods or services; and

+ incase of exemption, the corresponding reference to the provision of the VAT Code or of the EU VAT
Directive or any other reference that the operation benefits from a VAT exemption.

This simplification rule does not however apply to:

+ — distance selling;

+ intra-Community supplies of goods and means of transport; and

« — supplies of goods and services referred to in Article 289-0, I1-1° of the VAT Code (operations for which
the customer established in another EU Member State has to reverse charge VAT).

10.1.2 Time limits

In principle, the invoice must be issued each time a supply is made. However, the invoice can be issued
periodically on a monthly basis for several supplies in the same calendar month (when the operations are very
frequent).

Given the administrative management, it is allowed to issue the invoice a few days after the actual supply. For
exempt intra-Community supplies of goods referred to in Article 262 ter J of the VAT Code, exempt supplies
of new means of transport referred to in Article 298 sexies II of the VAT Code and supplies of services for
which VAT is due by the recipient in application of Article 196 of the EU VAT Directive, the invoice is issued
at the latest on the 15" day of the month following the one during which the chargeable event took place. The
invoice can be issued periodically for severat distinct supplies of goods or several distinct supplies of services
rendered to a single recipient for which VAT is due within the same calendar month. This invoice is then
issued at the latest by the end of this said month.

10.1.3 Curreney

‘The amounts on the invoice may be mentioned in another currency, provided that the amount of VAT to be
paid or regularized is stated in Euros.

10.1.4 Conversion and exchange rate
When the elements used to determine the taxable amount are expressed in a currency other than Euro, the

exchange rate to be applied is the last exchange rate published by the European Central Bank, on the date on
which the VAT is due.

10.1.5 Self-billing

A prior invoicing mandate should be concluded between the supplier and his customer. However, this
invoicing mandate is not subject to a particular formalism, i.e. this mandate may be a tacit mandate. The
parties must be able to prove the existence of this invoicing mandate. As a consequence, it is recommended to
keep a proof in writing.

The factual circumstances sufficient to establish the existence of an implicit mandate may, for example, result
from the fact that the invoices in question expressly state that they were physically issued by the agent on
behalf and for the account of the supplier. The modalities of the invoicing mandate including its scope can be
freely defined by the supplier and his agent.

Any invoice issued in the name of and for the account of the supplier shall be subject to acceptance by the latter.
‘The parties are free to determine the modalities of acceptance. A procedure of tacit acceptance is allowed.

In order to avoid any ambiguity, it is advised to include on the invoice “invoice issued by A in the name
of and for the account of B”. When the material issuance of the invoices is assigned to the customer,
“Autofacturation” must be mentioned on the invoice.

When the invoicing mandate is concluded with a customer or an agent established in a country with which
a legal instrument relating to mutual assistance similar in scope to that laid down by Directive 2010/24/EU
of 16 March 2010 and Council Regulation Nr. 904/2010 of 7 October 2010 does not exist, some specific
conditions are required:

France | 227

--- Page 44 ---
+ the supplier must issue a prior and written mandate to his customer or to his agent;

+ the supplier must notify the existence of this invoicing mandate to the French Tax Authorities. This
notification is done in writing (either by letter or by email), with the reference to the name and address
of the customer or agent when this customer or agent issues on a regular basis the invoices in the name
of and for the account of the supplier. The criteria of “regular basis” are assessed in comparison to
the number of invoices or their periodicity. In practice, it is accepted that the notification is not filed
voluntarily by the supplier when the number of transactions invoiced does not exceed the threshold of 10
transactions per calendar year;

+ the supplier must be informed by his customer or agent of the place of establishment of the person
materially issuing the invoices and of any change in this place of establishment;

* invoices issued under this mandate must be issued as soon as the taxable event occurs; and

+ periodic invoices cannot be issued under this mandate.

10.1.6 Simplified invoices
A simplified invoice may be issued in several cases:

(a) Invoices for low amounts

The invoices containing a total net amount lower or equal to EUR 150 may omit the following items:
+ the French VAT registration of the supplier; and
+ the VAT mention referring to the VAT Code or the EU Directive article.

This simplification cannot be applied to the transactions for which:

+ the mention of the French VAT number is compulsory according to 2° of I of Article 242 nonies A of
Annex II to the VAT Code;

+ areference to the benefit of a VAT exemption measure is provided for by a provision of the VAT Code
other than 12 ° of I of Article 242 nonies A of Annex II to the VAT Code.

This simplification is not applicable to distance sales and (deemed) intra-Community supplies.

(b) Measures applicable to certain activities

+ motorway tolls
Billing arrangements for tolls paid on each pass, excluding those paid on subscriptions or through flow-
through cards operated by third parties, are permitted. The receipts issued at the toll gates are deemed
invoices if they mention all the information referred to in a) above and include a space reserved for the
information to be provided by the user. The customer identification should be mentioned by the customer.

+ restaurants
For invoices below or equal to EUR 150 excluding taxes, it is allowed that the customer identification
elements not be mentioned by the company issuing the invoice but that they be entered by the customer
himself in a reserved area. These invoices must mention the information referred to in a) above.

Under certain conditions, simplified invoices can also be issued in case of down payment invoices or in case
of amending invoices.

10.1.7 Storage of invoices

Information, documents, data, computer processing, information systems constituting the documented
and permanent controls put in place in order to establish a reliable audit trail between the invoice issued
or received and the supply of goods or services as well as documentation supporting their modalities

of performance, must be kept for 6 years. The administration with respect to electronic-, telecom- and
broadcasting services must be kept for 10 years.

The authenticity of the origin, the integrity of the content and the readability of the invoice must be guaranteed
from its issuance until the end of the storage period. Such obligations are also applicable for paper invoices.

228 | France

--- Page 45 ---
Paper invoices received or issued can be stored electronically or under paper form. When paper invoices are
stored in electronic form only, the conditions guaranteeing the identical reproduction of the invoice (image
and content) are the following: documented organization of the digital archiving process subject to in-house
business controls, availability, readability, integrity of the scanned invoices.

‘The integrity of the scanned invoices is ensured if below recommendations are notably complied with:
* Picture editing programs are forbidden;
» Incase the taxable person uses compression file, it should be operated without any loss;
+ Each scanned invoice must be stored under PDF or PDF A/3 (ISO 19005-3) format and be associated to:
- either a server seal based on a certificate compliant at least with the general referential of security
“RGS” at the level one star;
- ora digital impression:
-  oran electronic signature based on a certificate compliant at least with the general referential of
security “RGS” at the level one star;
- or any other equivalent secured method based on a certificate delivered by a certification authority
mentioned on a French Trusted List (Trust-service status List - TSL).
* Each file is date-stamped according to an in-house date stamping source in order to date the different
operations performed.

Electronic invoices must be stored in their original electronic format as the change of format does not
guarantee the integrity of the content of the invoices.

However, for management purposes, the taxable person is free to change the electronic format of the invoices
ifhe parallelly stores them in their original format (¢.g. a taxable person who receives invoices under XML.
format must store them in this format but can convert them also into PDF format for internal management
purposes).

Paper output invoices can be stored under one of the following options:

+ printing two paper invoices: one is sent to the client, the other is stored by the supplier; the invoice is
stored as paper version by the supplier;

* _ printing two paper invoices: one is sent to the client, the other is digitized by the supplier according to the
process depicted above to ensure the integrity of the scanned invoices; or

+ securing the files of invoices stored under PDF or PDF A/3 according to the process depicted above to
guarantee the identical reproduction of the invoice. The resulting secured pdf file is printed once for
transmission on paper to the client, the original pdf version is stored by the supplier.

Invoices issued by the operator or, in his name and on his behalf by his customers or by a third party, and all
invoices he receives, must be stored on the French territory when the storage is not conducted by electronic
means guaranteeing immediate, complete and online access to relevant information.

Scanned paper invoices and electronic invoices can be stored outside the French territory provided that:

+ The invoices are stored in the EU, each Member State being bound by Council Directive No. 2010/24/
BU of 16 March 2010 concerning mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties
and other measures and by Council Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 of 7 October 2010 on administrative
cooperation and combating fraud in the field of VAT. In such case, the accessibility of the invoices by
the French tax administration must be guaranteed from the seat or principal establishment of the audited
taxable person.

+ Ifthe invoices are stored outside the EU, the taxable person must ensure that either the non-EU country
concluded with France a mutual assistance convention equivalent to Council Directive No. 2010/24/
EU of 16 March 2010 and to Council Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 of 7 October 2010, or the non-EU
country is bound with France by a convention foreseeing a right of immediate access, download and use
of all data by electronic means.

France | 229

--- Page 46 ---
+ The taxable person must inform the competent local tax office of the place of storage outside France
(names and addresses of the persons in charge of the storage and periods of time involved) and of any
change in the place of storage.

10.1.8 Electronic invoicing

10.1.8.1 General rules

An electronic invoice is an invoice or a flow of invoices created, sent, received and stored in any electronic
format. The entire invoicing process must be electronic,

The recipient of the invoice will be considered as having received an electronic invoice and is only required
to store it in a dematerialized format.

Electronic invoices can be issued under 3 technical means:

+ asa structured message using agreed standards among the parties that ought to be readable by computer
and capable of being automatically and unambiguously processed (electronic data interchange (EDI)
procedure);

+ with an advanced electronic signature;

+ in any electronic format provided that documented and permanent controls are put in place in order to
establish a reliable audit trail between the invoice issued or received and the supply of goods or services.

The authenticity of the origin, integrity of the content and readability of an invoice sent by electronic means
must be ensured by the issuer and the recipient, from its issuance until the end of its storage period, at the
choice of the taxable person by using one of the above mentioned methods.

The recipient of an invoice is not bound by the securing method chosen by the issuer. The same taxable
person can use different securing methods depending on whether he acts as an issuer or a recipient. The
same taxable person can use concomitantly different methods (e.g. for different invoices or flows of invoices
directed to different customers),

The recipient must accept beforehand the use of the electronic transmission procedure. This acceptance
can be formally materialized or be tacit, for instance, when the acquirer or the recipient settles the invoice
received or in case a reasonable delay is granted to the recipient to require a paper invoice.

The issuer is free to choose the technical mode of transmission of electronic invoices (by email, as attachment
to an email, via a secured network or use of the EDI system, directly in the IT services of trading partners or
via platforms of services owned by third parties).

The choice of the file format is left free to each taxable person, subject to the fulfilment of the conditions of
the definition of the electronic invoice.

10.1.8.2 Mandatory e-invoicing

Electronic invoicing was supposed to become compulsory from 1 July 2024 for domestic B2B transactions

between VAT taxable entities established in France, but its implementation bas been postponed according to

the following timetable:

+ 1 September 2026: obligation for all companies to receive electronic invoices and obligation for large and
mid-cap companies (ETI in French) to issue electronic invoices;

+ 1 September 2027: obligation for small and medium-sized companies (PME in French) to issue electronic
invoices.

Contrary to what was expecied, the issue, transmission and receipt of electronic invoices will be carried out

only using a registered private platform (PDP), Invoicing data issued by taxable entities using a registered
private platform will be forwarded by the registered private platform directly to the tax authority.

230 | France

--- Page 47 ---
10.2 Compliance

10.2.1 VAT return period

Under the standard regime, a taxable person must file monthly VAT returns. When the annual amount of VAT
due is less than EUR 4,000, the taxable person can file quarterly VAT returns.

Under the simplified regime and under specific conditions, a taxable person can file annual VAT returns,

10.2.2. Filing of VAT return and payment
Taxable persons, whether established in France or not, must file electronic VAT returns.

French taxable persons, non-BU taxable persons subject to tax representation must, in principle, file their VAT
returns according to a date provided by the authorities, mostly between the 21* and 24" day afer the end of
the reporting period

‘The taxable persons established in other EU Member States and non-EU taxable persons exempt from tax
representation must file the VAT return at the latest on the 19" day after the end of the reporting period, or on
the 24" day after the end of the reporting period when they carry out imports subject to VAT deferment, called
“reverse-charge on import” in France.

Anil return must be filed when no taxable operations have been made.

If the due date falls on a public holiday, Saturday or Sunday, the due date is postponed to the next business
day.

The e-payment of VAT by direct debit is mandatory for all taxable persons, including foreign taxable
persons holding a bank account in a bank established in the countries and territories which are part of the
jurisdictional scope of the SEPA schemes, and which opted for the SEPA B2B standard.

E-payment by direct debit must be ordered by the VAT return filing due date. The actual debit by the French
tax administration always takes place after this due date,

Taxable persons who do not meet the conditions of e-payment of VAT by direct debit can continue paying
VAT to the French tax administration by bank transfer. In such case, the funds must be credited on the bank
account of the French tax administration on the VAT return filing due date at the latest.

Transactions that do not require the filing of VAT returns in France:

French VAT registered taxable persons are not required to file VAT returns when they perform solely VAT
exempt intra-Community acquisitions referred to in Article 262 ter-II-3° of the VAT Code and/or VAT exempt
deemed intra-Community acquisitions in France when followed by supplies of goods or services subject to
reverse-charge by the recipient.

There is also a current practice from the non-resident tax office consisting in considering that the sole
performance of deemed intra-Community supplies from France to another EU country requires a VAT
registration but does not imply the obligation to submit VAT returns.

In above cases, French VAT registered taxable persons are only liable for the filing of Intrastat returns (if a
letter is received from the Customs authorities notifying them of their liability to file Intrastat returns— see
paragraph 10.4) and EC sales listing with the French customs authority.

10.2.3. European sales listing

‘The European sales listing named “état récapitulatif TVA” in French must be filed online on the customs?
website, on a monthly basis, only when intra-Community supplies from France ot simplified EU triangulation
are performed. If no transaction is performed, there is no need to file any nil EC sales listing.

France | 231

--- Page 48 ---
The following data must be filed in the EC sales listing:

+ the VAT identification number of the customer;

+ for each customer, the total amount (without VAT) of the supply in EUR;
+ — the amount of commercial regularizations, if any;

+ the regime code.

‘The due date for filing the retum is the 10" working day of the month following the end of the reference
period (including Saturdays).

A penalty of EUR 750 per retum can be imposed in case the EC sales listing has not been filed within the
deadline. This can amount to EUR 1,500 per month in the case of absence of filing following 30 days after the
receipt of a formal notice.

Each omission or inaccuracy in the declaration produced results in the application of a fine of EUR 15, up to a
maximal total of EUR 1,500.

10.2.4 National recapitulative statement
There is none.

10.2.5 Tax assessment period

‘The tax assessment period in France is 3 years, e.g, operations conducted in 2025 can be assessed until 31
December 2028, It is extended until the origin of the VAT credit.

10.3 Penalties

10.3.1 Default penalties for late registration

Backdated VAT registrations are allowed in France in certain cases and upon acceptance by the authorities.
If VAT was due to the French State on a past period, a 5% and/or 10% penalty can be applied on the VAT
amount as well as interest for late payment.

In case of “bad faith” or occult activities, penalties may be higher.

10.3.2 Default penalties for not filing a VAT return on time

The following penalties apply on the VAT amount:

* 10% if there is no notice of assessment or if the taxpayer submits the VAT return within 30 days from the
receipt of the first notice;

+ 40% if the taxpayer fails to submit the return within 30 days afier the receipt of the first notice; or

* 80% if the taxpayer fails to submit the return within the receipt of the second notice.

In case of zero-rated transactions, the French authorities can apply a penalty for failure to file VAT returns.
When the VAT returns which should have been filed do not include any element for the calculation of the VAT
due, i.e. when the operations which should have been reported are VAT exempted or lead to a VAT credit, the
applicable penalty is EUR 150 per lacking VAT return,

10.3.3 Default penalties for not paying VAT on time to the tax authorities

If the VAT is not paid on time (even if the return is filed on time), the penalty is 5% of the VAT amount due
and possibly 0.2% per month (interest for late payment). The payment is only recognized when the sums are
credited on the bank account of the tax office.

A5% penalty (based on the deductible VAT) for failure to reverse charge VAT in the corresponding VAT

return can be imposed. The French administration does not, however, apply this penalty in case of voluntary

and spontaneous regularization occurring before any tax notice. This regularization can be performed under

two practices:

+ the reporting is done in a corrective VAT return concerning the period during which the reverse-charged
transaction should have been declared; or

232 | France

--- Page 49 ---
+ the reporting is done in an ulterior VAT return subject to a clear mention of the elements related to the
reverse charged transaction.

Specific guidance applies for the regularization of certain types of transactions (e.g. importations).

10.3.4 Default penalties on VAT assessments when VAT is not reported correctly
The French administration can apply the penalties of 5% and/or 10% of the VAT amount, and possibly late

payment interests, even in case of voluntary and spontaneous regularization occurring before any tax notice.
Mitigation can be negotiated on a case-by-case basis.

Tn other cases (e.g. in case of audit by the authorities, intention or negligence), the above-mentioned penalties
are applicable (see paragraphs 10.3.2 and 10.3.3).

10.4 Intrastat

This single report has been de-merged and the Intrastat called in French “Enquéte Mensuelle statistique sur
Jes Echanges de Biens Intra-Union européenne” (so-called EMEBD), i.e. statistical survey on intra-EU trade
in goods, must be filed online only in the event the company has received a notice letter from the French
customs authorities informing the company of the requirement to reply to the survey.

The letter informs the company about the flows of goods concemed: arrival, dispatch or both, along with the
period of time covered by this obligation.

10.4.1 Intrastat threshold

‘There is no official threshold to reach to become liable for the Intrastat/EMEBI returns filing, The liability
starts at receipt of the letter from the customs authorities (see section 10.4)

10.4.2 Intrastat data to be reported

The information which needs to be reported in the Intrastat return are:

+ the nature of the movement of the goods (ie. arrival or dispatch);

+ the reference period (i.e. the reporting month);

+ the partner VAT ID number;

+ the commodity code of the goods;

+ the invoice value of the goods or the statistical value;

+ the net weight in kilograms of the goods without all their packaging:

+ the supplementary units (units of measurement other than kilograms, depending on the commodity code);

+ the country of destination (for dispatches) / country of consignment (for arrivals);

+ the country of origin within the meaning of customs regulations on origin;

+ the regime code (e.g. intra~Community acquisition, other arrival following processing etc.):

* the transaction nature code (e.g. purchase, sale, return of goods, repair etc.);

+ the means of transport, for instance “by road” or “by sea”; and

+ the French department (two-digit numerical code) of initial shipment of the goods for dispatches or actual
destination for arrivals.

Distance sales of goods dispatched from France to another EU Member State must be included in the EMEBI
return for dispatches.

Distance sates of goods dispatched from another EU Member State to France are not to be included in the
EMEBI return for arrivals.

A return is filled in for each type of flow (arrival or dispatch).

The due date for filing the return is the 10" working day of the month following the end of the reference
period (including Saturdays).

A penalty from EUR 75 to EUR 150 per return can be imposed in case the EMEBI has not been filed within
the deadline,

France | 233

--- Page 50 ---
A penalty of EUR 2,250 can also be applied in case of repeated refusals to comply with the deadlines or
to transmit the information and documents requested or no presentation to a summons of the customs
authorities.

An omission or inaccuracy in the declaration may result in a finding of non-filing and the application of above
fines.

10.4.3. “Déclaration Européenne de Services” (DES)

Taxable persons established in France must, trom the first euro, declare the supplies of services subject to the
general principle of Article 44 of the EU VAT Directive when the customer is a taxable person established in
the EU who will reverse charge the VAT on the supply in his country of establishment (Article 196 of the EU
VAT Directive),

The due date for filing the return is the 10" working day of the month following the end of the reference
period (including Saturdays).

‘The following data must be filed in the DES:
+ the VAT identification number of the customer;

+ for each customer, the total amount (without VAT) of the supply in EUR; and
+ the amount of commercial regularizations, if any.

‘The penalties are the same as the penalties applied for the EC Sales listing (see paragraph 10.2.3).
10.5 Additional compliance requirements

10.5.1 Real time reporting of taxable operations

E-reporting will be compulsory for mostly non-domestic B2B transactions (known as B2B International)
and B2C transactions, along with the e-invoicing reform (see paragraph 10. 1.8.2 above) according to the
following timetable:

+ 1 September 2026: for large and mid-cap companies (ETI in French);

+ 1 September 2027: for small and medium-sized companies (PME in French).

E-reporting will cover the transmission of transaction data to the tax authority, along with transmission of
transaction payment data, using a registered private platform (PDP).
Information received from: Emmanuel Cotessat Société d’ Avocats

Emmanuel Cotessat
emmanuel.cotessat

cotessat.com

Quynh Nguyen Scappaticci
quynh.nguyen@cotessat.com

Maité Tsikis
maite.tsikis@cotessat.com

Alexandre Poleau

alexandre.poleau@cotessat.com
www.colessat.com

234 | France

--- Page 51 ---
Germany

‘The European Union (EU) VAT Directive is implemented in Germany through the “Umsatzsteuergesetz
2005”, VAT is officially referred to as “Umsatzsteuer (USt)” or in common language as “Mehrwertsteuer
(MwSt)”. Besides that, the German Federal Ministry of Finance published the Administrative VAT Guidelines
referred to as “Umsatzsteuer-Anwendungserlass (UStAE)” which provide the official opinion of the German
tax administration and is updated regularly.

1. Taxable persons

A taxable person (Unternehmer) is defined in sec. 2 of the VAT Act as anyone who carries out a commercial
or professional activity independently, regardless of whether they have legal capacity under other regulations.
In other words, a taxable person is any independently operating person or entity that performs supplies for
remuneration on a continuous basis (or has the intention, supported by objective evidence, to carry out a
taxable activity for remuneration and independently and makes initial capital expenditure for this purpose).
Neither the legal form nor the legal capacity of the supplier is relevant.

Ll Registration threshold & SME Scheme for domestic taxable persons

In principle, all taxable persons have to register for VAT. Small businesses, however, enjoy a VAT exemption
according to sec. 19 of the VAT Act and do not have to register. This concession applies to all taxable persons
irrespective of their legal form. As from 2025, the exemption applies to small businesses established in
Germany if the annual turnover realized in Germany did not exceed EUR 25,000 (without VAT) during

the previous calendar year and as long as the tumover realized in Germany does not exceed EUR 100,000
(without VAT) in the current calendar year. Certain VAT-exempt supplies (mainly exempt supplies without
the right to deduct input VAT) do not have to be considered when determining whether the thresholds were
exceeded.

Where the relevant supplies are below the threshold, the taxable person is not obliged to charge VAT. On the
other hand, it cannot deduct any VAT incurred on the acquisition of goods or services. However, under certain
conditions the smal] business may be liable for VAT under the reverse charge scheme stipulated in sec. 13b of
the VAT Act (without input VAT deduction), This would result in an obligation to register for VAT and to file
VAT returns.

1.1.1 Voluntary registration

It is possible to register for VAT voluntarily before the relevant threshold is exceeded, even retroactively.
Small businesses may irrevocably declare to the tax office by the last day of February of the second calendar
year following the refevant tax period that he waives the application of the exemption. The waiver shall take
effect from the beginning of the tax period to which it is to apply. The waiver shall bind the taxable person for
at least five calendar years, The taxable person may revoke the waiver with effect from the beginning of the
following calendar year.

1.1.2 Provision of intra~-Community B2B goods and services

Where a domestic taxable person provides intra-Community supplies of goods and / or services to other
taxable persons which have to be declared in the VAT Information Exchange System (VIES), it needs to
apply for a VAT-ID no. (with the country prefix DE) separately with the Federal Central Tax Office. This

is necessary because taxable persons only get a national tax number for VAT purposes (with a different
structure and without the country prefix DE) and require an additional EU-VAT-ID no. for intra-Community
transactions.

From 2025, small businesses established in Germany who do not exceed the thresholds mentioned above have
the choice to apply the VAT exemption for small businesses for supplies in other EU Member States, too. The
taxable person will then have to participate in a specific reporting procedure as stipulated in sec. 19a of the
VAT Act. For this purpose, the taxable person will get a specific identification number for small businesses
with the annex “EX” from the Federal Central Tax Office under which the supplies in other EU Member
States have to be reported quarterly within one month after the end of each quarter of the year. Furthermore,

Germany | 235

--- Page 52 ---
the exemption only applies if the turnover according to Art. 288 of Directive 2006/112/EU (for all supplies
throughout the EU) did not exceed EUR 100,000 (without VAT) during the previous calendar year and as long
as this tumover does not exceed EUR 100,000 (without VAT) in the current calendar year. And last but not
least, the conditions for the VAT exemption for small businesses of the relevant other Member State must be
met as well.

1.2 _ Registration threshold & SME Scheme for foreign taxable persons

‘As from 2025, small businesses established in another EU Member State (irrespective of their legal form)
enjoy the same VAT exemption as domestic taxable persons according to sec. 19 of the VAT Act and do not
have to register. The exemption applies if the turnover according to Art. 288 of Directive 2006/112/EU (for
all supplies throughout the EU) did not exceed EUR 100,000 (without VAT) during the previous calendar
year and as long as this tumover does not exceed EUR 100,000 (without VAT) in the current calendar year.
Furthermore, a specific identification number for small businesses must be assigned to the taxable person in
the Member State where it is established.

If the VAT exemption for small businesses applies, the taxable person is not obliged to charge VAT. On the
other hand, it cannot deduct any VAT incurred on the acquisition of goods or services, not even in the VAT
refund procedure according to the Directive 2008/9/EC. However, the small business may be liable for VAT
under the reverse charge scheme stipulated in sec. 13b of the VAT Act (without input VAT deduction). This
would result in an obligation to register for VAT and to file VAT returns.

1.2.1 Voluntary registration

Itis possible to register for VAT voluntarily before the relevant threshold is exceeded, even retroactively. A
small business may irrevocably declare to the competent tax office in his Member State of establishment that
he waives the application of the exemption. The waiver shall take effect from the beginning of the quarter of
the year following receipt of the waiver. If the waiver is received by the authority during the last month of a
quarter of the year, it shall take effect as from the beginning of the second month of the following quarter. The
waiver shall bind the taxable person for at least five calendar years, The taxable person may revoke the waiver
with effect from the beginning of the following calendar year.

1.2.2 Registration procedure

When registering, the following information must be submitted:

+ ategistration form;

+ the articles of association;

= anexcerpt from the commercial register; and

+ acertificate of being a taxable person (i.e. VAT registration certificate from the country of establishment).

‘The registration form can be downloaded at the following link: https:/Avww,formulare-bfinv.de/ffw/content.do
Itnormally takes 2 to 4 weeks to register for VAT purposes.

‘The proper tax office is dependent on the location of the foreign business. For taxable persons established
in Germany, usually the tax office of the district in which the taxable person carries out its business is
competent. For foreign taxable persons, German VAT laws stipulate respective rules of competence,
depending on the country where the foreign taxable person is established. in principle, the Tax Office Berlin
International is responsible for foreign taxable persons. However, for taxable persons established in the EU
Member States and in specific third countries, the competent tax offices are:

* Austria: Tax Office Miinchen

+ Belarus: Tax Office Magdeburg

+ Belgium: Tax Office Trier

+ Bulgaria: Tax Office Neuwied

* Croatia: Tax Office Kassel

+ Czech Republic: Tax Office Chemnitz-Siid

+ Denmark: Tax Office Flensburg

+ Estonia: Tax Office Rostock

* Finland: Tax Office Bremen

236 | Germany

--- Page 53 ---
+ France (and Monaco): Tax Office Offenburg

+ Greece: Tax Office Berlin International

+ Hungary: Central Tax Office Nirmmberg

+ Ireland: Tax Office Hamburg-Nord

+ Italy: Tax Office Miinchen

* Latvia: Tax Office Bremen

» Liechtenstein: Tax Office Konstanz

+ Lithuania: Tax Office Mahlhausen

+ Luxembourg: Tax Office Saarbriicken Am Stadtgraben

+ North Macedonia: Tax Office Berlin International

+ Netherlands: Tax Office Kleve

+ Norway: Tax Office Bremen

+ Poland: Tax Office Hameln-Holzminden (entrepreneurs, whose surnames or company names begin with
the letters A through to G)

+ Poland: Tax Office Oranienburg (entrepreneurs, whose surnames or company names begin with the letters
H through to L)

+ Poland: Tax Office Cottbus (entrepreneurs, whose surnames or company names begin with the letters M
through to R)

+ Poland: Tax Office Nordlingen (entrepreneurs, whose surnames or company names begin with the letters
$ through to Z)

* Portugal: Tax Office Kassel

+ Romania: Tax Office Chemnitz-Siid

+ Russia: Tax Office Magdeburg

* Sweden: Tax Office Hamburg-Nord

+ Switzerland: Tax Office Konstanz

* Slovakia: Tax Office Chemnitz-Sitd

+ Spain: Tax Office Kassel

+ Slovenia: Tax Office Oranienburg

+ Turkey: Tax Office Dortmund-Unna

« Ukraine: Tax Office Magdeburg

« United Kingdom (and Isle of Man): Tax Office Hannover-Nord

+ USA: Tax Office Bonn-Innenstadt

13 VAT grouping

When 2 or more taxable persons established or having a fixed establishment in Germany are closely bound
to one another by financial, economic and organisational links, those persons are treated as a single taxable
person for VAT purposes. The treatment as a VAT group is obligatory in Germany if the conditions are met
(sec, 2 para, 2 no. 2 of the VAT Act).

Financial links exist if more than 50% of the shares of the members are directly or indirectly held by the
same person(s). Organizational links exist if the members are under common management or where the
management of one member is actually subordinate to that of another. Economic links exist where the
activities of the members are mainly aimed at achieving the same economic goal or carried out for the benefit
of the other members of the group.

Only taxable persons can form part of'a VAT group, which excludes “pure” holding companies. VAT grouping
is limited to the German entities / fixed establishments of the group.

The VAT group must file one VAT return only, ie. a single VAT return, in the name of the head of the group.
If the head of the group is not located in Germany, another taxable person must be selected as the head of the
VAT group. The members of the VAT group are jointly and severally liable for payment of the VAT debts of
the group. Nevertheless, each member of the group may apply for a separate VAT identification number.

Germany | 237

--- Page 54 ---
14 Fiscal representative

A foreign taxable person from an EU or a non-EU country does not have to appoint a fiscal representative for
registering for VAT purposes in Germany. It is possible to register directly for VAT purposes in Germany.

A foreign taxable person may appoint a fiscal representative according to sec. 22a of the VAT Act if it
provides only VAT exempt supplies and is not incurring any input VAT in Germany (i.e. does not have any
costs with German VAT). This avoids a VAT registration and filing of VAT returns since the exempt supplies
are reported under a specific VAT-ID of the fiscal representative.

2. Taxable transactions

21 Transfer of business

Germany has implemented an out of the scope of VAT rule for the sale of a business or a separated part of the
business in sec. 1 para 1a of the VAT Act (transfer of a going concern). It is essential that all important parts
of the business are transferred and that the transferee continues the business. The transferee must be a taxable
person. The transferee steps into the tax position of the transferor (i.c. takes over all transferor’s rights and
obligations related to VAT).

2.2 Supplies free of charge

The following supplies of goods free of charge shall be regarded as a supply for consideration and be subject

to VAT (sec. 3 para, 1b of the VAT Act):

+ the removal of an asset by a taxable person from his business for purposes other than those of its business;

+ the contribution of goods without consideration by a taxable person to its employees for their private use,
unless it is a gift for a special (personal) occasion of small value (up until EUR 60 net per gift);

+ any other contribution of goods without consideration, with the exception of gifts of small value (up until
EUR 50 net per year per recipient) and samples of goods made for the purpose of the business.

If it is already known at the moment of the acquisition of goods that these goods are to be used for rendering
supplies free of charge, the taxable person acquiring the goods is not entitled for an input VAT deduction. On
the other hand, in such a situation, the supply free of charge is not subject to VAT since the input VAT was not
deducted.

The following shall be regarded as a supply of service for consideration (sec. 3 para. 9a of the VAT Act):

+ the use of goods, for which input VAT was deducted, in full or partially, by a taxable person for purposes
other than those of its business or for the private use of its employees, unless it is regarded as a gift for a
special (personal) occasion of an employee of small value (up until EUR 60 net per gift);

+ the supply of a service without consideration by a taxable person for purposes not connected with the
business or for the private use of its employees, unless it is regarded as a gift for a special (personal)
occasion of an employee of small value (up until EUR 60 net per gift).

2.3. Importation

2.3.1 Importation followed by an intra-Community supply

The importation of goods which will be subject to an immediate subsequent intra-Community supply is zero-
rated according to sec. 5 para. 1 no. 3 of the VAT Act (customs procedure 4200) if the importer:

* provides its German VAT-ID (or the VAT-ID of its fiscal representative);

* provides the VAT-ID of the acquirer in the other EU Member State; and

* provides proof that the imported goods are intended to be shipped to another EU Member State.

23.2 Postponed accounting on importation

Import VAT generally must be paid immediately, upon the importation for any goods from places outside
of the EU. Germany does not provide for a postponed accounting scheme, meaning that the import VAT is
declared in the VAT return. However, taxable persons enjoy an extension and have to pay the import VAT by

238 | Germany

--- Page 55 ---
the 10th day after import. Furthermore, in the event that the taxable person was granted a deferment account
in accordance with Art. 110 (b) or (c) of the Union Customs Code, the import VAT incurred upon importation
into Germany is only due on the 26th day of the second month following the month of import (sec. 21

para. 3a of the VAT Act). In principle, the taxable person must also provide security for the amount of import
duties and import VAT that are to be deferred. However, the security is not to be provided if the taxable
person is fully entitled to deduct input VAT.

3. Place of supply

31 Consignment and call-off stock

A foreign taxable person moving stock to Germany must, in principle, register for VAT purposes in Germany.
It will then have to report intra-Community acquisitions because of the transfer of own goods when
replenishing the stock and domestic supplies in Germany when the goods are pulled from the stock.

According to the jurisprudence of the Federal Fiscal Court with respect to consignment stocks, however, a
foreign taxable person will not have to register in Germany but rather provide direct supplies to Germany (at
the moment the goods are transferred to the stock) if a binding purchase contract is in place at the beginning
of the transport to the stock.

Furthermore, if certain conditions are met, the simplification scheme according to Art. 17a of the EU VAT
Directive which was transposed to sec. 6b of the VAT Act applies. The German VAT legislation is in line
with the relevant articles of the EU VAT Directive and stipulates that the supplier does not perform a transfer
of own goods followed by a domestic supply but rather an intra-Community supply to his customer at the
moment the goods are pulled from the stock,

3.2 Installation supplies

Certain supplies including installation (Werklieferung or Montagelieferung) are treated as supplied where
they are installed (sec. 3 para. 7 of the VAT Act). In Germany, a supply including installation is considered a
Werklieferung if the supplier uses his own good(s) for the supply which are not of minor importance for the
supply and the customer provides certain goods which become part of the final construction (sec. 3 para. 4 of
the VAT Act). A supply including installation is considered a Montagelieferung if the supplier only uses his
own good(s) for the supply. This distinction is relevant for the application of the reverse charge scheme (see
paragraphs 8.1.1).

If the goods are of minor importance, the supply is qualified as a service. Whether the goods used for the
Werklieferung or Montagelieferung are of minor importance or not does not depend on the value of the goods
Rather, what is relevant is if the goods form a dominant part of the supply. Only for the repair of movable
tangible goods where it is hard to determine the importance of the goods supplied, the Administrative

VAT guidelines allow a determination based on the value of the goods. If the goods used for the repair
amount to more than 50% of the total value of the supply, the repair is considered to be a supply of goods
(Werklieferung).

3.3 Distance sales

In principle, the place of supply of goods is where the transport commences (sec. 3 para. 6 of the VAT Act)
However, the place of supply shifts to where the transport ends for intra~Community distance sales once the
supplier exceeds the uniform EU threshold of EUR 10,000 (sec. 3c of the VAT Act). Turnover generated from
the supply of ‘electronically supplied services’, telecommunication services and broadcasting services are
included in the EUR 10,000 threshold.

Once the threshold is exceeded and distance sales to German customers are deemed to be carried out in

Germany, the supplier may either register directly in Germany or in its country of establishment via the One-
Stop-Shop to account for German VAT for its distance sales to Germany.

Germany | 239

--- Page 56 ---
It is possible to opt for taxation in the country of arrival (i.e. Germany) before the threshold is exceeded. It is
necessary to inform the German tax authorities. The option is binding for 2 years. If Germany is the country
of dispatch of the goods, it is necessary to inform the German tax authorities in writing if a taxable person
opts for taxation in the country of arrival before the threshold is exceeded.

3.4 Simplified triangulation rules

Under German VAT legislation, the simplified triangulation rules have been implemented in line with the EU
VAT Directive in sec. 25b of the VAT Act.

Taxable persons A, B and C in the ABC transaction must be registered for VAT in different EU countries (i.e.
in countries 1, 2 and 3), The transport must be organized by either A or B. The goods must be transported
directly from A in country 1 to C in country 3.

The simplified triangulation rules can be applied if (among other conditions):

+ Germany is the country of arrival of the goods; and

+ the middleman (B) is not resident in Germany; and

+ the middleman (B) issues an invoice without VAT but referring to a simplified triangulation and the VAT
liability of the last acquirer (C).

Where Germany is the EU Member State of destination of the goods, the wording of the German legislation
does not preclude the application of the triangulation rules if the middleman (B) is VAT registered in Germany
or in the country of dispatch. It does preclude the application of the triangulation rules if the middleman (B) is
established in Germany.

In principle, the simplification is only applicable to transactions where 3 parties are involved (ABC
transaction). However, according to the Administrative VAT guidelines, the simplification is also applicable to
transactions where more than 3 parties are involved but only to the last 3 parties in the supply chain (the intra-
Community supply takes place between B and C).

35 Acquisition threshold

Where a specific taxable person (non-taxable legal persons, taxable persons exclusively engaged in VAT-
exempt activities, flat-rate farmers) established in Germany acquires goods from a taxable person in another
EU Member State, that acquirer is liable to report intra-Community acquisitions if the threshold of EUR
12,500 was exceeded during the previous calendar year or once this threshold is exceeded during the current
calendar year.

3.6 _ Effective use and enjoyment

3.6.1 Outbound transactions

For the following outbound services performed to a taxable person established in Germany, sec. 3a para, 8 of
the VAT Act (based on Art. 59a(a) of the EU VAT Directive) stipulates that these are taxable outside the EU if
the effective use and enjoyment of the services takes place outside the EU:

+ transport of goods, loading / unloading and similar services connected to transport of goods;

+ work on movable, tangible goods and evaluation of such goods; and

+ certain services relating to fairs, exhibitions and such travel services.

Furthermore, sec. 3a para. 7 of the VAT Act stipulates that the short-term rental of a railway vehicle, a motor
bus or a road vehicle intended exclusively to transport goods, the rental is deemed to be rendered outside the
EU:

+ if the supply is provided to a taxable person established outside the BU;

+ the vehicle is intended for his business; and

+ is used in the non-EU country.

3.6.2 Inbound transactions
For the following inbound services performed by a taxable person established outside the EU, where the
240 | Germany

--- Page 57 ---
supply would otherwise be regarded as made outside the BU, sec. 3a para. 6 of the VAT Act (based on
Art. 59a(b) of the EU VAT Directive) stipulates that these are taxable in Germany if the effective use and
enjoyment of the services takes place in Germany:

+ short-term renial of means of transport (B2B and B2C)

+ long term rental of means of transport (B2B and B2C); and

+ telecommunications and radio and television broadcasting (B2B and B2C).

‘This regulation, furthermore, covers the following services if rendered by a taxable person established outside

the EU to a legal person under public law established in Germany if used and enjoyed in Germany:

+ transfers/assignments of copyrights, patents, licenses, trade marks and similar rights as well as the
obligation to refrain from such rights;

+ advertising services;

+ services of consultants. engineers, lawyers, accountants and similar services;

+ translation services;

+ data processing;

+ provision of information;

+ banking, financial and insurance transactions;

+ supply of staff;

+ obligation to refrain from a business activity; and

+ hiring out of movable property, except all means of transport.

4, Chargeable event & chargeability of VAT

4.1 Principles

In the case of a supply of goods or services, the VAT becomes, in principle, chargeable at the time the goods
or services are supplied. For goods, this is the date when they are placed at the disposal of the acquirer.

A supply of goods involving their transportation is deemed to be carried out at the date the transport
commences. A supply of service is deemed to be carried out at the date the service is finally executed.

For intra-Community acquisition of goods, the VAT becomes chargeable on issue of the invoice, latest on the
15* day of the month following the acquisition if no invoice has been issued by that time.

For supplies subject to the reverse charge mechanism, the VAT becomes chargeable on issue of the invoice,
latest on the last day of the month following the supply if no invoice has been issued by that time. The VAT
on the purchase of a service, which falls under the main rules of Articles 44 and 196 of the BU VAT Directive,
is nevertheless due at the time the service is supplied.

If VAT was unduly charged, this VAT becomes chargeable on the date of issuing the invoice.

42 Advance payments

Where a payment is to be made on account before the goods or services are supplied, VAT becomes
chargeable on receipt of the payment.

4.3 Continuous supplies

Services ongoing over a period of more than 1 year, that do not give rise to statements of account or payments
in that period and for which the customer is liable to account for the VAT on the basis of Article 196 EU VAT
Directive, are regarded as being supplied on the expiry of each full calendar year up to the time the provision
of the services ceases.

4.4 Cash accounting

Upon request, the tax authorities may permit a taxable person to opt to apply a cash accounting scheme for
the payment of the VAT, in accordance with sec. 20 of the VAT Act, if:

Germany | 241

--- Page 58 ---
+ the total turnover in the previous calendar year did not exceed EUR 800,000;

+ the taxable person is exempt from the obligation to keep an accounting pursuant to Article 148 of the
General Fiscal Code; or

* to the extent the laxable person carries out supplies as a member of an independent profession within the
meaning of Sec. 18 para. 1 no. 1 of the Income Tax Act.

Where the scheme applies, output VAT is chargeable when the payment is received, and input VAT is
chargeable when the payment is made. It is not foreseen in the VAT legislation to mention ‘cash accounting”
on the invoice.

5. Taxable amount

5.1 Bad debt relief

In Germany, bad debt relief is available to taxable persons, provided they prove to the satisfaction of the tax
authorities that the amount not yet paid by the customer became a bad debt in the relevant period (sec. 17
of the VAT Act). The claim is made by reducing the tax base in the VAT return in the period of the debt
becoming uncollectable. The tax office may require evidence of uncollectability, but there are no guidelines
for this.

5.2 Cash discounts

In cases where the supplier offers a discount for settlement within a specific time limit, the taxable amount
shall be the amount after the discount is applied, meaning the actual payment.

Example:

“Supply of goods EUR 1,000
19% VAT EUR 190
Total to be paid EUR 1,190

If payment is received by us within the next 14 days, you can subtract 2% of the invoice as a cash discount”

Payment is indeed received within 14 days. In that case the supplier must pay EUR 186 (EUR 190 less 2%)
in his VAT return. The customer can deduct EUR 186 in his VAT return, The supplier does not need to send a
credit invoice for the 2%.

5.3 Open Market Value

Where sole traders supply goods or services to their related parties and where corporate entities and

associations of persons supply goods or services to their sharebolders, proprietors, members, partner or

person related to such and if the consideration actually paid is lower than;

+ the acquisition or production costs (where goods are supplied);

+ the costs associated with the provision of a service, to the extent input VAT was deducted for these costs
(where a service is rendered),

then the costs are the taxable amount rather than the consideration paid (sec. 10 para. 5 no. | of the VAT Act).

However, in such scenarios, the taxable amount shall be limited by the open market value.

‘The same regulation applies to supplies of goods and services by a taxable person to its employees and their
relatives on the basis of the employment relationship (sec. 10 para. 5 no. 2 of the VAT Act).
54 Returnable packaging

Germany did not implement any of the options according to Art, 92 of the EU VAT Directive in the VAT Act.
However, the Administrative VAT Guidelines provide for extensive regulations on returnable packaging and
differ between different kinds of packaging:

242 | Germany

--- Page 59 ---
+ packaging required for the delivery of the goods, e.g. bottles: the amount to be paid for it is deemed to be
part of the taxable amount of the packed goods:

* packaging facilitating the transport. e.g. pallets, crates, containers: the amount to be paid for it is deemed
to be a remuneration for a separate supply of the packaging.

Once the packaging is returned to the supplier and the remuneration for the packaging is paid back to the
customer, the taxable amount for the initial supply is deemed to be reduced and the VAT can be recovered by
the supplier. If the customer is 2 taxable person, he must reduce the input VAT deduction accordingly. It is not
required to issue a credit note or any similar document.

6. VAT rates

61 Standard rate
‘The standard rate in Germany is 19% (sec. 12 para. 1 of the VAT Act).

6.2 Reduced rate

The reduced rate in Germany is 7%. Sec. 12 para. 2 of the VAT Act stipulates to which supplies it applies, for
instance:

+ the supply of food and beverages (except alcoholic beverages);

+ hotel accommodation;

+ books, magazines and newspapers;

* passenger transport; and

+ art.

6.3 Super-reduced and zero rates

Germany has not implemented a super-reduced rate or a zero rate.

7. Exemptions

TA Exemptions with the right to deduction

Germany zero-rates the following supplies and services (with the right to input VAT deduction) according to
sec. 4 no, 1 ~ 7 of the VAT Act

* exports and intra~-Community supplies of goods;
+ supplies relating to maritime traffic and aviation;
* cross-border transportation of goods related to import/export;

* supplies of monetary gold to central banks;

* supplies of goods under customs control or VAT warehousing arrangements;

+ the transport of goods under customs bond;

* — supplies to armed forces of the NATO and to armed forces of other EU Member States; and
+ — supplies to intergovernmental institutions and to diplomatic missions.

7.1.1 Intra-Community supplies

The intra-Community supply of goods is zero-rated according to sec. 4 no. | lit. b of the VAT Act under the
conditions of sec. 6a of the VAT Act and if the particular Recapitulative Statement was filed correctly.

Furthermore, proof is necessary that the goods have left Germany. Acceptable proof includes certain
bookkeeping records, the transport documentation and certain confirmations of the customer. If a freight
forwarder is involved, a copy of the invoice and a special confirmation of the freight forwarder are
required. However, the standard proof for intra~Community supplies is the so-called Gelangensbestatigung
(confirmation of arrival — entry certificate). The above rules can still be used in order to prove the transport

Germany | 243

--- Page 60 ---
besides the presumptions of transport as mentioned in Art, 45a Implementing Regulation which was also
transposed into national law.

7.1.2 Export supplies

The export of goods is zero-rated according to sec. 4 no. 1 lit. a of the VAT Act under the conditions of sec. 6
of the VAT Act.

Furthermore, proof is necessary that the goods have left the EU. The so-called Ausgangsvermerk
(confirmation of export) of the Automated Tariff and Local Customs Clearance System (ATLAS) is
considered to be the standard documentary proof. Altemative proof, such as bills of lading, airway bills or
freight forwarder certificates, is accepted only if an export has not been declared in the electronic ATLAS
procedure or if, in special cases, the electronic export procedure could not be completed as required.

7.1.3 Warehousing

7.1.3.1 VAT warehouse

Germany implemented VAT warehouse regulations. A permission from the tax authorities is necessary to
maintain a VAT warehouse. The warehouse can be used for the storage of specific types of predetermined
goods. In addition to the goods listed in Annex V of the EU VAT Directive, the following additional products
can be put into a VAT warehouse:

+ gold (CN code 7108);

+ pulp from wood (CN code 4703);

+ iron and steel products (CN code 7207 - 7212); and

+ non-ferrous metal (CN code 8101).

Anon-established trader is not required to register for VAT when placing goods in the VAT warehouse but
must register for VAT when selling goods in the VAT warchouse or releasing goods from a VAT warehouse.
When placing non-EU goods into a VAT warehouse, the importation is exempt for VAT purposes. This
exemption becomes final for the supplier of the goods if the goods are sold in the VAT warehouse and remain
under the arrangement. The release from the VAT warehouse arrangement triggers VAT liability, unless an
exemption (e.g. intra-Community supply, exportation) applies, In that case the non-established trader in
principle must register in order to declare the intra-Community supply. But if this is his only activity, he may
appoint a fiscal representative.

However, Germany decided to abolish the VAT warehouse regulations as from Ist January 2026 since these
were applied rarely and required extensive administrative efforts.

7.1.3.2 Excise warehouse
Germany has not implemented excise warehousing.
7.1.3.3 Bonded (customs) warehouse

Bonded warehouses are possible in Germany but are covered by the Customs Code. There is, generally, no
influence on VAT if goods are placed in a bonded warehouse. If the goods are placed in a customs warehouse,
no import VAT applies as the goods are not released into free circulation but remain under customs control.
The sale within the warehouse is subject to a zero VAT rate under the condition that the goods are finally
cleared for customs. Import VAT is due when the goods are cleared for customs.

72 Exemptions without the right to deduction

There are various exemptions without the right to input VAT deduction in Germany (sec. 4 no. 8 — 29 of the
VAT Act). A few are mentioned below.
7.2.1 Exemptions in the public interest

Certain hospital services, medical and paramedical care, cultural activities, ambulance services, services
rendered by undertakers, educational services, services of a cultural or social nature, some services connected
with sports, etc. are examples of exemptions in the public interest. Some exemptions, however, are granted

244 | Germany

--- Page 61 ---
on the condition that the supplier is a non-profit institution and/or on the condition that no distortion of
competition will occur as a result of the exemption.

7.2.2 Other exemptions

The other exemptions are financial and banking services, insurance services, management of collective
investment funds, postal services, non-commercial activities, letting of immovable property, the supply of
immovable property, services by religious, charitable organizations, etc.

7.3 Option for taxation

The taxable person may (among others) opt for taxation in case of certain financial transactions, insurance
transactions, sale and rental of real estate if the turnover is executed for another taxable person for the taxable
activity of the latter. In case of rental of real estate, the option is only allowed if the customer is exclusively
using or planning to use the real estate for turnovers allowing input VAT deduction.

8. Liability

81 Reverse Charges

In Germany there are several obligatory reverse charge rules besides the reverse charge for general B2B
services provided by non-resident suppliers to taxable persons and legal entities with a German VAT-ID
number established in Germany. This reverse charge applies in all EU Member States and follows from Art.
44 and Art. 196 EU VAT Directive.

8.1.1 General reverse charge mechanism - non-resident suppliers (Art. 194 EU VAT Directive)

There is a reverse charge for services supplied in Germany as well as for supplies of goods including
installation (limited to Werklieferungen — not applicable to Montagelieferungen — see 3.2) in Germany
performed by a non-established taxable person (sec. 13b para. | and para. 2 no. | in conjunction with sec. 13b
para. 5 of the VAT Act). A mere VAT registration does not avoid reverse charge, i.e. the reverse charge also
applies if a non-established supplier is registered for VAT in Germany. On the other hand, reverse charge
applies irrespective of whether or not the recipient is VAT registered or resident in Germany. The recipient
may be obliged to register in order to fulfil the reverse charge obligation. The reverse charge scheme

for supplies of non-established taxable persons does not apply to certain passenger transport services, to
admission to conferences, exhibitions, fairs etc., to services of fair organization companies rendered to non-
established persons and to restaurant services aboard ships, planes and trains.

On the invoice, reference must be made to the application of the reverse charge scheme. The supplier must
use the following text on the invoice “Steuerschuldnerschaft des Leistungsempfiingers”. A remark in a foreign
language (for example: Reverse Charge") is possible.

8.1.2 Reverse charge mechanism - specific domestic rules (Art. 199 EU VAT Directive)

On the following supplies of goods and/or services the domestic reverse charge rules apply (sec. 13b para. 2
no. 2~ 12 of the VAT Act in conjunction with sec. 13b para. 5 of the VAT Act) :

+ supply of goods provided as security by one taxable person to another in execution of that security outside
insolvency procedure;

+ — supply of immovable property with an option for taxation;

+ supply of construction work, particularly supplies of goods including installation and supplies of services
in relation to immovable property aiming for the construction, repair, maintenance, alteration and
demolition of buildings and constructions to customers providing construction work on a regular basis;

+ supply of natural gas and electricity supplied by non-resident suppliers to “taxable dealers”;

+ supply of emission rights;

+ supply of old, used materials, scrap, waste and specific services;

+ cleaning of buildings;

+ supply of gold;

+ supply of mobiles, tablet computers, games consoles and integrated circuits if the value is not less than
EUR 5,000;

Germany | 245

--- Page 62 ---
+ supply of certain precious metals (like silver, platinum etc.) if the value is not less than EUR 5,000; and
+ telecommunication services to resellers.

Reverse charge always applies if the customer is a taxable person, regardless if he is established or VAT
registered in Germany or not.

A supplier must refer to the reverse charge scheme. The following text is to be mentioned on the invoice
“Steuerschuldnerschaft des Leistungsempfingers”. A remark in a foreign language (for example: Reverse
Charge“) is possible.

8.2 i nt and several liability

Under German law, managing directors of businesses can be held jointly and severally liable for the unpaid
taxes of the businesses they manage.

Joint and several liability also exists for businesses that form part of a VAT group for the VAT debts of each
member of the VAT group for the entire period that the relevant entity was part of that VAT group.

Joint and several liability also exists in situations of carousel fraud.

9. Recovery of input VAT

91 Non-recoverable input VAT

The input VAT is not recoverable in case of:

+ purchases being related to VAT exempt supplies not allowing input VAT deduction;

+ gifts for non-employees if the limit of EUR 50 per year and per recipient is exceeded; and

* expenses for guest houses, hunting and fishing, yachts and excessive expenses related to private living.

9.2 Excess input VAT

Excess input VAT is immediately recoverable and refunded by the VAT authorities.

9.3. Adjustment periods

+ immovable property - 10 years after first use;
+ movable property - 5 years after first use.

94 VAT refund to EU taxable persons

The claim must be submitted electronically via a portal of the country of residence and is submitted by the
local tax authorities to the Bundeszentralamt fiir Steuern (www,bzst.bund.dc), The minimum period is 3
months (mninimum amount: EUR 400), maximum period is one year (minimum amount: EUR 50). The claino
must be filed within 9 months after the end of the calendar year (30 September). After that date, filing of a
return is only possible in very limited circumstances (for example, in case of serious illness etc.).

Scanned invoices or import documents must be attached if the VAT amount is more that EUR 1,000 (fuel: EUR 250).

The deadline for refunding the outstanding VAT amount is 4 months and 10 working days after receipt of
the claim (ie, application), otherwise the refund is interest-bearing, The deadline is postponed in case the
refunding office needs additional information. After having received an assessment, the period for a possible
appeal is normally one month.

The special procedure is only applicable if the foreign taxable person is not obliged to register for VAT in
Germany. If the foreign taxable person is obliged to register for VAT in Germany, all input VAT incurred must
be declared in the VAT return,

For non-refundable VAT please refer to 9.1.
246 | Germany

--- Page 63 ---
95 VAT refund to non-EU taxable persons

In case of a non-EU non-resident taxable person, a refund claim must be submitted electronically using the
Online-Portal of the Bundeszentralamt filr Steuern (BOP). Claimants will have to register first before using
the BOP. Detailed information is available at: http://www.bzst.de.

The minimum period is 3 months (minimum amount: EUR 1,000), maximum period is one year (minimum
amount: EUR 500). The claim must be filed within 6 months after the end of the calendar year (i.e. before
30 June), A submission of the claim on paper and a signature is not required anymore due to the registration
process prior to the electronic filing, After 30 June, filing of a claim is only possible in very limited
circumstances (for example in case of serious illness ete.).

All original invoices, original import documents and a certificate of taxable status must be sent to the
Bundeszentralamt flir Steuern by postal mail. These original documents must arrive before the 6 months
period elapses.

VAT refund is depending on reciprocity. Reciprocity is given for the following countries:
+ Andorra
» Antigua and Barbuda

+ Australia
+ Bahamas
» Bahrain

+ Bermuda
+ Bosnia and Herzegovina

+ Brunei
+ Canada

+ Cayman Islands
+ Gibraltar

+ Greenland

+ Grenada

+ Guernsey

+ Hong Kong

+ Iceland

+ Tran

> Tag

+ Israel

+ Jamaica

+ Japan

+ Jersey

+ North Korea
+ South Korea
+ Kuwait

+ Lebanon

+ Liberia

+ Libya

+ Liechtenstein
+ Macao

+ Macedonia

+ Maldives

* Marshall Islands
* New Zealand

+ Norway
+ Oman
+ Pakistan
+ Qatar
+ Serbia

* San Marino

Germany | 247

--- Page 64 ---
Saudi Arabia

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Solomon Islands

Swaziland

Switzerland

‘Taiwan

Vatican

Virgin Islands

United Arab Emirates

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
USA.

The special procedure is only applicable if the foreign taxable person is not obliged to VAT register in
Germany, If the foreign taxable person is obliged to register for VAT in Germany, all input VAT incurred must
be declared in the VAT return.

10.

Administrative obligations

10.1 Invoices

10.1.1 Invoice content

A VAT invoice must contain the following information (sec. 14 para. 4 of the VAT Act):

date on which the invoice is issued;

invoice number (unique and sequential);

VAT identification number/tax number under which the supply is performed;

full name and address of the supplier;

full name and address of the customer and the VAT identification number of the customer in case of intra-

Community supplies and cross border reverse charges;

quantity and nature of the supplied goods or quantity and type of the supplied services;

date of supply of goods or services; in the case where an invoice is issued before the respective supply

is carried out, the date when the payment is fully or partially received, provided that this payment date is

known and is not identical to the invoice date;

taxable amount, split up according to the applicable VAT rates resp. applicable VAT exemptions, as well

as any discounts or rebates agreed beforehand unless they are not already accounted for in the taxable

amount;

applied VAT rate(s);

VAT amount;

reason for the application of an exemption, zero rate or reverse charge. For instance:

+ intra~-Community supply: “Tax exempt intra~Community supply” resp. “steuerfreie
innergemeinschaftliche Lieferung”;

+ export supply: “Tax exempt export supply” resp. “steuerfreier Export”;

+ reverse charge: “reverse charge” resp. “Steuerschuldnerschaft des Leistungsempfingers”;

name, address and VAT identification number of the fiscal representative (if applicable);

the information necessary to determine whether there is a new means of transport;

in case of self-billing the remark “Gutschrift”; and

an indication of the fact that a margin scheme has been applied.

Please note that the references are not required to be in German.

10.1.2 Time limits

For

supplies of goods including installation (“Werklieferung”) and supplies of services in connection with

immovable property, an invoice has to be issued within 6 months after the supply was performed. For supplies
to other taxable persons or to non-taxable legal persons an invoice has to be issued within 6 months after

248

| Germany

--- Page 65 ---
the supply was performed as well. For certain transactions, such as intra-Community supplies and supplies
subject to the reverse charge, the invoices must be issued within 15 days after the end of the month in which
the supply was rendered.

10.

The invoice may be issued in any currency. It is not necessary to mention an exchange rate or an equivalent in
Euro.

3 Currency

10.1.4 Conversion and exchange rate
For conversion of the invoice into a foreign currency either the actual bank rate must be used or, alternatively,

a monthly exchange rate published by the German Federal Ministry of Finance. The exchange rate of the
ECB may also be used.

10.1.5 Self-billing

‘Under German VAT legislation, self-billing is allowed in cases where it was agreed upon in advance. If the
recipient of the document protests it, then the document loses the character of an invoice. On the document, it
must be stated that it is a self-billing invoice (“Gutschrift” resp. “self-billing”).

10.1.6 Simplified invoices

It is possible to issue a simplified invoice if the total amount of the invoice is not higher than EUR 400, A.
simplified invoice must contain the following information:

+ full name and full address of the supplier;

«date of issue;

+ quantity and nature of the supplied goods or the quantity and type of the supplied services;

+ total invoice amount including taxable amount and VAT amount for the supply; and

+ applicable VAT rate or reason for the application of an exemption.

10.1.7 Storage of invoices
Invoices need to be kept available for 8 years. Generally, invoices must be stored in Germany. After approval

by the tax authorities, invoices may be stored outside of Germany. Invoices may be stored electronically. In
case of electronic invoicing, it is obligatory to store the invoices electronically.

10.1.8 Electronic invoicing

Invoices can be issued by electronic means, after acceptance by the recipient, provided that the authenticity of
the origin, the integrity of the content and the legibility of the invoice is ensured.

With effect from Ist January 2025 the regulations on electronic invoicing were extensively amended
Electronic invoices in a structured format (according to Directive 2014/55/EC and CEN standard 16931 or
interoperable with it) have to be issued under the following conditions:

+ supplier is a taxable person established in Germany;

+ customer is a taxable person established in Germany;

+ place of supply is deemed to be in Germany; and

+ supply is not VAT-exempt according to sec. 4 no, 8 ~ 29 of the VAT Act.

The ¢-invoicing (in a structured format) does no longer require the consent of the parties.

The e-invoice obligation applies from 1 January 2025, with transitional provisions only for the invoice issuer,
i.e. the obligation to issue invoices. Invoice recipients are obliged to accept the receipt of e-invoices, without
restriction from 2025 if they receive supplies from other taxable persons established in Germany.

The following transitional provisions apply to invoice issuers:

+ In 2025 and 2026, paper invoices and other electronic invoices, such as PDF (the latter still only with the
consent of the invoice recipient) will continue to be permitted, in addition to e-invoices in a structured
format;

+ In 2027, taxable persons with a total turnover of up to EUR 800,000 in the previous calendar year may
continue to issue paper invoices and other electronic invoices (the latter still only with the consent of the
invoice recipient) to their customers);

Germany | 249

--- Page 66 ---
+ In 2027, EDI invoices may also continue to be issued with the consent of the invoice recipient. EDI
invoices may only be used if they are compatible with thc CEN standard and both parties have agreed to
their use.

Simplified invoices are not subject to the e-invoicing regulations,
10.2 Compliance

10.2.1 VAT return period

‘The standard VAT return period is a calendar quarter, Monthly VAT retums must be filed if the yearly VAT
liability exceeded EUR 7,500 in the previous calendar year. Additionally, a yearly (summarizing) VAT retum
must be filed.

No quarterly or monthly VAT returns but only annual VAT returns must be submitted if the annual amount of
VAT due is less than EUR 1,000, The VAT returns, in general, have to be submitted electronically.
10.2.2 Filing of a VAT return and payment

The VAT due must be received on the bank account of the tax authorities on the 10" day of the following
month. If this date falls on a weekend or a bank holiday, the VAT is due on the next business day (i.e. the VAT
for October 2024 must be received by the VAT authorilies by 11" November 2024). The same applies for the
VAT return.

An extension of one month may be granted against prepayment (1/1! of the last year’s VAT liability). Filing
can be done via htips://www.elsteronline.de/eportal/
10.2.3 European sales listing

European sales listings must be submitted on a monthly basis if the intra~Community supply of goods
exceeds EUR 50,000 in the current quarter or in any of the 4 preceding quarters. The European sales listings
for services can be submitted on a quarterly basis, regardless of the period for the intra-Community supply
of goods. The European sales listings must be filed, as a general rule, electronically. Filing can be done via
huips://www.elsteronline.de/eportal/. There is no threshold for filing the European sales listings.

10.2.4 National recapitulative statement

There are no national recapitulative statements in Germany except for the yearly summarizing VAT return.

10.2.5 Tax assessment period

In Germany the statute of limitation is 4 years (15 years in case of tax fraud). The statute of limitation starts at
the end of the year in which the tax return had been filed (ie. if the VAT return for 2021 was filed in 2022, the
period ends on 31 December 2026).

In order to avoid that the deadline never ends if the taxable person fails to file a return, there is the fall-back
position that the limitation period starts automatically after 3 years (i.e. if no VAT return is filed for 2021, the
limitation period ends on 31 December 2028). After that date, assessments or amendments are no longer possible.

10.3 Penalties

10.3.1 Default penalties for not filing a VAT return or an EC Sales List on time

If the VAT return is not filed on time, the penalty may amount to up to 10% of the tax due, with a maximum
of EUR 25,000, The penalty is at the discretion of the tax authorities.

If the EC Sales List is not filed on time, the VAT authorities can issue a penalty of 1% of the tax base to be
declared in the listing with a maximum of EUR 2,500.

10.3.2 Default penalties for not paying VAT on time to the tax authorities

Tf the VAT is not paid on time, the VAT authorities will assess a penalty of 1% of the outstanding amount per
month,

250 | Germany

--- Page 67 ---
10.3.3 Default penalties on VAT assessments when VAT is not reported correctly

Interest will be assessed on outstanding amounts as well as on refunds. The rate is 0.15% per month, Interest
period starts 15 months after the end of the respective catendar year (ie. for 2024 interest will be paid starting
from | April 2026).

10.3.4 Offence penalties

The VAT law allows penalties up to BUR 50,000, In case of tax fraud, the penalty may be up to 5 years prison
ora fine, The interest rate is 0.5% per month,

10.4 Intrastat

Intrastat returns must be submitted to the Statistical Central Office (Statistisches Bundesamt). A monthly
return is required which is due on the 10th working day of the following month at the latest.

All taxable persons who are registered for VAT in Germany (and were assigned a German VAT number) are
generally required to file Intrastat returns if they perform intra-Community supplies or acquisitions (including
transfer of own goods) unless the threshold mentioned below is not exceeded. This also applies to distance
sales. Only sales to private persons in other EU Member States where the customer is responsible for the
transport, do not have to be reported. Ifa fiscal representative was appointed, the obligation to file Intrastat
returns is shifted to the fiscal representative.

10.4.1 Intrastat threshold
The Intrastat threshold is for the arrivals EUR 3,000,000 and for the dispatches EUR 1,000,000 per year.

10.4.2 Intrastat data to be reported

The information which needs to be reported (depending on arrival or dispatch) is:
+ VAT number of the supplier;

+ reference period (i.e. the reporting month);

+ EU Member State of dispatch or destination;

+ State of dispatch or destination;

+ country of origin;

+ nature of the transaction (e.g, purchase, sale, return of goods, repair etc.);

+ means of transport, for instance “by road” or “by sea”;

+ HS Code (8-digit harmonized commodity code according to Combined Nomenclature (C'N));
+ statistical value in Euro;

+ VAT ID number of the customer;

+ quantity of the goods (i.e. net weight in kilograms);

+ other measure for certain goods (liters, m? or number of pieces); and

* invoice value of the goods in Euro.

10.5 Additional compliance requirements

There are no additional requirements.

Information received from:

Ronny Langer
KMLZ Rechtsanwalts GmbH
ronny.langer@kmlz.de
www.kmiz.de

49 89 217 50 1250

Germany | 251

--- Page 68 ---
282 | Germany

--- Page 69 ---
Greece

Value Added Tax (VAT) was introduced in Greece in 1986 (and came into force as of Ol January 1987)
through law 1642/1986 and is currently regulated by law 5144/2024 “Kedrxac @épov [Ipooti@épevng
Ablac” (“Value Added Tax Code”), Greek VAT legislation transposes into domestic law the provisions of
the European Union (EU) VAT Directive. VAT is referred to in Greece as “@dpog poo 0éjevnc Aziac” or
“OILA”.

1. Taxable persons

1.1 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for domestic taxable persons

Domestic taxable persons, engaging in economic activity, have the obligation to register with the tax
authorities and acquire a tax registration number, There is no separate registration for VAT purposes or a
separate VAT number, as the tax registration number acquired covers all taxation purposes. In this respect,
there is no threshold for taxable persons as to their obligation to be registered with the tax authorities.

If, however, a specific business falls under a special VAT scheme or engages in VAT exempt activities, or
activities outside the scope of VAT, this is declared to the tax authorities upon its registration, so that its VAT
obligations, if any, are observed by the tax authorities accordingly.

Greek VAT law provides for the small enterprises scheme with a threshold of EUR 10,000. Still however the
persons that are eligible for the scheme are required to VAT register.

The tax registration is made with the central tax administration. The documents that need to be provided for
the tax registration vary, depending on the legal type of the domestic taxable person.

Additionally, domestic taxable persons need to submit certain other forms which must be completed as well
for the registration,

The forms may be downloaded at the following link: https:/tinyurl.com/3sv9vhrm

1.2 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for foreign taxable persons

Foreign taxable persons that perform taxable transactions in Greece for which a VAT registration is required,
have the obligation to VAT register, without any threshold or exception being applicable. The VAT registration
of EU entities is made electronically, through submission by email of the required form to the designated tax
office at the e-mail address doyaathinon@ 1836.syzefxis.gov.gr

‘The aforementioned form can be downloaded at the following link: hitps://tinyurl.com/3sv9vhrm

The tax office subsequently verifies the declared information with the data recorded with the VAT Information
Exchange System (VIES) and, having confirmed that this information is accurate, issues the VAT number and
communicates it to the applicant by email. On average, the VAT number is issued within two weeks of the
electronic submission of the required form.

In the case of non-EU taxable persons, Greek VAT registration is made through the appointment of a fiscal
representative. EU taxable persons who need to VAT register in Greece have the option, but are not required,
to appoint a fiscal representative, if they do not want to proceed with the above direct registration. To this end,
the foreign business needs to send:

= a power of attomey to the (legal or natural) person that will be appointed as the fiscal representative;

+ its articles of association; and

+ acertificate of good standing.

Greece | 253

--- Page 70 ---
All these documents must be notarized and apostilled. The fiscal representative submits them, together with
their translation in Greek and certain tax forms filled in by the fiscal representative, to the fax office that is
competent for the fiscal representative.

These tax forms can be downloaded at the following link: ht(ps://tinyurl.com/3sv9vhrm
On average, the VAT number is issued within two weeks of the submission of the above documents.

13 VAT grouping
VAT grouping is not possible under Greek VAT law.

1.4 Fiscal representative

Taxable persons established in non-EU countries that carry out taxable transactions in Greece for which
they become liable for VAT (and for which the reverse charge mechanism is not applicable), are in principle
required to appoint a fiscal representative in order to fulfil their Greek VAT obligations.

On the other hand, taxable persons established in EU Member States that carry out taxable transactions in
Greece for which they become liable for VAT (and for which the reverse charge mechanism is not applicable)
have the option to appoint a fiscal representative, or to proceed with a direct registration. In all cases where

a fiscal representative is appointed, the representative is liable to the Greek State for the fulfilment of his
principal’s Greek VAT obligations. For the procedure of the appointment of a fiscal representative see
paragraph 1.2.

By way of exception from the above, non-EU taxable persons are not required to appoint a fiscal
representative in case they operate under a special license for the deferral of VAT on import (see paragraph
2.3.2.1) in which case they may proceed with a direct registration like EU taxable persons.

In the event the EU or non-EU taxable person, who has the requirement to VAT register in Greece and
account for Greek VAT, does not proceed with such registration, then the Greek customer becomes liable
to the Greek State to account for the VAT due that is not charged and paid by the foreign supplier, if such
customer is a taxable person. However, this will not be the case, if the EU or non-EU taxable person is
considered to have a fixed establishment in Greece,

2. Taxable transactions

21 Transfer of business

According to Greek VAT legislation, the transfer of a going concer falls outside the scope of VAT.

This applies to the transfer of a business in its totality, sectors or parts of a business, with or without
consideration, or in the form of contribution to existing or new legal persons, unless the transferor or the
transferee is engaged exclusively in VAT exempt activities which do not allow the deduction of the input VAT.
‘The transferee is required to continue carrying out the transferred business.

2.2 Supplies free of charge

The application by a taxable person of goods forming part of his business assets for his private use or for that

of his staff, or their disposal free of charge for purposes other than those of his business, is treated as a supply

of goods for consideration, where the VAT on those goods or the component parts thereof was deductible.

However, the application of goods for business use as samples or as gifts of small value shall not be treated as

a supply of goods for consideration. Gifts of small value are defined as goods:

+ whose purchase price, or in the absence thereof, their market value, excluding VAT, does not exceed EUR
10 per person

+ the goods offered do not constitute part of a successive series of offers to the same person;

+ the total value of the goods offered does not exceed in one fiscal year 1% of the gross revenues of the enterprise; and

284 | Greece

--- Page 71 ---
+ the goods offered are not of the same kind as the goods the enterprise sells, produces or manufactures.

Samples are goods offered by an enterprise to its clients and to the public, without consideration, for
promotional purposes, provided that:

+ they are the same with the goods sold, manufactured or produced by the enterprise

+ bear the mark “free sample”; and

+ they are offered in reasonable quantities so that they become known and their quality is assessed.

2.3 Importation

2.3.1. Importation followed by an intra~Community supply

It is possible to apply an exemption on the importation of goods into Greece (with the exception of excise
goods), if it is followed by an intra-Community supply (within 5 days). In such case the importer must be a
taxable person registered with VIES. If the importer is established in another EU Member State or established.
in a non-EU country, he needs to appoint a fiscal representative in Greece or, under certain conditions, acquire
a VAT number under the direct registration procedure (this latter option is only available for EU established
importers).

The exemption is applicable provided that the customer who is established in the other EU Member State is a
taxable person registered with VIES. Furthermore, the respective invoices need to be submitted to the relevant
customs authorities, as well as the transport contract or transport documents proving the transport of the
goods to the other EU Member State. Subsequently the importer needs to submit to the customs authorities
the European Sales Listing and Intrastat return where the intra-Community supply has been declared.

2.3.2 Postponed accounting on importation

2.3.2.1 Import VAT deferral scheme

Foreign taxable persons with no establishment in Greece are allowed to perform imports into Greece without
paying VAT upon importation at the customs office. The tax is assessed on the respective customs documents
but it is accounted for by the importer through the filing of the respective periodical VAT return. To this end, a
VAT registration is required. By way of exception, non-EU taxable persons which qualify for this scheme are
not required to appoint a fiscal representative but they can proceed with a direct registration like EU taxable
persons.

The application of the above simplification is subject to strict conditions, among which, the realization of an
annual yolume of imports of at least EUR 40 million and the export or intra~Community supply of at least
90% of the statistical value of the imported items on an annual basis. In case of groups of companies, the
aforementioned requirements are taken into consideration for all the companies of the group as a whole.
Special licensing is provided in this respect, subject to the aforesaid conditions and other standards (e.g.
creditworthiness) being met. The license may include all the group companies that will qualify for this
simplification,

2.3.2.2 Other simplified procedures allowing postponed accounting of VAT on import

Greek corporate entities or natural persons that engage in transactions which fall within the competence of
customs authorities and need to be declared to them, are allowed to apply for simplified procedures on import
of goods from non-EU countries. Instead of paying the duties and VAT every time an import is made, the duties
and VAT of the whole month can be declared cumulatively until the 5" day of the month following the month
of importation, This total amount must subsequently be paid ultimately on the 16" day of that month. For
deduction purposes the VAT thus paid can be included in the VAT return of the period during which it was paid.

The aforementioned simplified procedures may apply following the issuance of a relevant authorization by

the competent customs authorities, Such authorization is subject to a guarantee and the fulfilment of the

following criteria;

+ appropriate record of compliance with customs requirements of the applicant, the persons in charge of the
applicant company or exercising control over its management and the person responsible in the applicant
company for customs matters;

Greece [ 255

--- Page 72 ---
+ proven financial solvency; and
+ satisfactory system of managing commercial, accounting and where appropriate, transport records.

3. Place of supply

3.1 Consignment and call-off stock

Greece has implemented the call-off stock simplification in accordance with Directive 2018/1910 without any
deviation.

In this respect, the movement of goods to Greece shall not be treatcd as an intra-Community transaction and

therefore the taxable person making the transfer of the stock will not declare an intra~Community supply

in the EU Member State of dispatch and an intra~-Community acquisition in Greece (for which it would be

required to obtain a VAT number in Greece, before the application of the simplification in question) at the

time it transfers the stock.

Instead, the taxable person making the transfer will declare an intra-Community supply in the EU Member

State of dispatch and the acquirer in Greece will declare an intra-Community acquisition, only at the time

the acquirer withdraws goods from the stock located in Greece. Thus the obligation for the supplier lo VAT

register in Greece will be avoided, provided that the below conditions for the call-off stock simplification are
met: both the supplier and the intended acquirer are taxable persons for VAT purposes;

+ the supplier has not established his business and he does not have a fixed establishment in Greece (VAT
registration of the supplier in Greece does not amount to establishment, therefore it allows the application
of the call-off simplification);

+ the goods are transported by the supplier or by a third party on his behalf from another EU Member State
to Greece with the intention of being supplied in Greece and after arrival to an intended customer;

+ the intended acquirer’s identity and VAT number are known by the supplier at the time when the transport
begins;

+ the acquirer is entitled to take ownership of the goods in accordance with an existing agreement;

+ the supplier should record the transfer of the goods in a special register, including the identity and the
VAT number of the acquirer; and

+ the supply to the acquirer should be made within 12 months from the arrival of the goods in Greece.

No simplification is available under Greek VAT law for consignment stock, Accordingly, non-Greek suppliers
need to VAT register in Greece and account for the Greek VAT due on the intra-Community acquisition of
goods in Greece and their subsequent local sale,

3.2 Installation supplies

When goods are supplied from abroad to Greece and the foreign supplier undertakes their assembly or
installation in Greece, then such a transaction is treated as a single domestic supply of goods subject to

Greck VAT. The foreign supplier is liable to register for VAT in Greece and charge Greek VAT on the supply,
without the reverse charge mechanism being applicable. There is no formal definition in the VAT Law as to
what constitutes installation or assembly. According to the guidelines of the Greek Ministry of Finance, the
aforementioned treatment applies in the event the goods are supplied to the customer after their installation/
assembly in Greece, and a single price is set for the goods and the installation/assembly, regardless of whether
the price is paid in lump sum or partially.

3.3 Distance sales

In case non-taxable legal persons, taxable persons exclusively engaged in exempt activities and flat-rate
farmers, who have in common that they are not liable for payment of VAT on their intra~Community
acquisitions of goods and private individuals, all of which are established in Greece, purchase goods, other
than new means of transport, or goods supplied after assembly or installation, with or without a trial run, by
or on behalf of the supplier, from a supplier in another Member State, the supplier must charge Greek VAT,
unless the total value, exclusive of VAT, of supplies of telecommunications, broadcasting and electronic
services or supplies of distance sales of goods does not in the current calendar year exceed EUR 10,000,

256 ! Greece

--- Page 73 ---
or the equivalent in national currency, nor did it do so in the course of the preceding calendar year. Where.
during a calendar year, the threshold of EUR 10,000 is exceeded, Greek VAT applies as of that time. Suppliers
can opt anyway for the place of supply to be Greece, and in such case the option shall cover 2 calendar years

3.4 Simplified triangulation rules

Under Greek VAT legislation, the simplified triangulation rules have been implemented in line with the EU
VAT Directive. The simplified triangulation rules can be applied if (among other conditions):

* Greece is the country of arrival of the goods;

+ the middleman (B) is not registered in the country of dispatch; and

+ the middleman (B) is not established in Greece.

Consequently, where Greece is the EU Member State of arrival of the goods the wording of the Greek
legislation precludes the application of the triangulation rules if the middleman (B) is VAT registered in the
country of dispatch, The middleman (B) must mention on his invoice that this is a triangular transaction. In
case Greece is the country of arrival of the goods, the simplification cannot be applied when 4 parties are
involved.

3.5 Acquisition threshold

The threshold for the intra~Community acquisition of goods by non-taxable legal persons, taxable persons
engaged in exempt activities with no right to deduct input VAT and flat-rate farmers ftom suppliers
established in another EU Member State is EUR 10,000 for Greece.

3.6 Effective use and enjoyment

Greece has implemented the effective use and enjoyment rule provided in Article 59a(a) of the EU VAT

Directive for the following services:

* transport of goods supplied to taxable persons; when the place of supply of such services is situated
within Greece, it will be considered as situated outside the EU when the transport services take place
exclusively outside the EU; and

+ short-term hiring of professional pleasure boats to taxable or non-taxable persons; when the place of such
services is situated within Greece, it will be considered as situated outside the EU when the boats are used
outside the EU;

Furthermore, Greece has implemented the effective use and enjoyment rule provided in Article 59a(b) of the

EU VAT Directive. In this respect, for the following services for which the place of supply is situated outside

the EU, Greece will be considered the place of supply (and, therefore, Greek VAT will be applicable) if the

effective use and enjoyment of these services takes place within Greece:

+ short-term hiring of means of transport to taxable or non-taxable persons and long-term hiring of means
of transport to non-taxable persons, to the extent the use of such means of transport takes place in Greece;

+ _ hiring out of movable tangible property to non-taxable persons, to the extent the use of such goods takes
place in Greece; and

+ telecommunications services, radio and television broadcasting services and electronically supplied
services to non-taxable persons, to the extent the recipient of the services is in Greece at the time such
services are supplied.

4, Chargeable event and chargeability of VAT

44 Principles

In the case of a supply of goods or services, VAT becomes, in principle, chargeable at the time the goods or
services are supplied.

When however the obligation exists to issue an invoice, VAT becomes chargeable on the date of issuing the
invoice, or on the date the invoice should have been issued. The VAT on the purchase of a service, which

Greece | 257

--- Page 74 ---
falls under the main rules of Articles 44 and 196 of the EU VAT Directive, is nevertheless due at the time the
service is supplied.

For intra-Community supplies of goods, VAT becomes chargeable when the invoice is issued and latest on the
15® day of the following month,

4.2 Advance payments

VAT does not become chargeable in case of advance payments, with the exception of advance payments that
correspond to services that fall within the main rule of Article 44 of the VAT Directive for which their place of
supply is Greece.

4.3. Continuous supplies

For supplies of services for which the consideration has been agreed to be paid in instalments, VAT becomes
chargeable when each instalment is due.

For supplies of services which last for more than one year and fall under the main rule of Srticle 44 of the
VAT Directive, VAT becomes chargeable at the end of the calendar year provided that no payments have
become due during the year.

4.4 Cash accounting

VAT is due to the tax authorities, when actually received from the customer in case of suppliers with an
annual turnover up to EUR 2 million, Cash accounting is optional and does not apply to exempt and zero rate
transactions, imports and intra-Community acquisitions of goods, transactions to which the reverse charge is
applicable, retail transactions and transactions whose place of supply is outside Greece.

5. Taxable amount

5.1 Bad debt relief
No bad debt relief is available under Greek VAT law.

However, the Greek Supreme Administrative Court has ruled that this is contrary to BU VAT law and the
taxable persons have the right to the refund of VAT on bad debts, in case the customer has been declared
bankrupt, has entered a rehabilitation procedure or has been placed under special administration, in
accordance with the Greek Insolvency Code.

Tn response to the above judgement of the Supreme Court, Greek tax administration issued guidelines which
only allowed bad debt relief for the rehabilitation procedure of a specific Greek retailer and its suppliers,
because this specific retailer’s case was examined by the Supreme Court. Although the Supreme Court ruled
in a general manner that VAT should be recovered when one of the aforementioned instances occur, Greek tax
administration limited the bad debt relief only to a specific case.

Nevertheless, in line with the aforementioned judgement of the Supreme Court, the Dispute Resolution
Directorate (which reviews administrative appeals) has also ruled that VAT should be refunded when the
customer has been declared bankrupt or has entered a rehabilitation procedure.

5.2 Cash discountsAssume that the supplier sends the following invoice:
“Supply of goods EUR 1,000
24% VAT EUR 240
Total to be paid EUR 1,240

If payment is received by us within the next 14 days, you can subtract 2% of the invoice as a cash discount”.

258 | Greece

--- Page 75 ---
Payment is indeed received within 14 days. In that case the supplier must issue a credit invoice to the
customer for the amount of the discount plus the corresponding VAT. Accordingly, the supplier will deduct
the VAT charged with the credit invoice from the output VAT he will declare in the month the credit invoice is
issued. The customer will deduct the VAT charged with the credit invoice from the input VAT he will declare
in the month the credit invoice is issued.

5.3 Open market value

In case of supplies of goods or services between affiliated persons, the taxable amount is the open market
value in the following cases:

+ where the consideration is lower than the open market value and the recipient of the supply does not have
a full right of deduction;

+ where the consideration is lower than the open market value and the supplier does not have a full right of
deduction and the supply is VAT exempt; and

* where the consideration is higher than the open market value and the supplier does not have a full right of
deduction.

5.4 Returnable Packaging

In case of goods which are supplied in returnable packaging, the value of the goods and the value of the
packaging should be reflected separately on the fiscal document, in case they are subject to different VAT
rates. In this respect, the taxable person has the option not to impose VAT on the value of the packaging upon
its supply and its return, If however, the packaging is not returned, VAT is due on the value of the packaging.

6. VAT rates

6.1 Standard rate

The standard VAT rate in Greece is currently 24%.

6.2 Reduced rate

‘The reduced rate is 13% and is applied to certain goods and services that are specifically stated in the VAT
law. This rate is applied to, for example:

* certain food products;

+ the supply of water;

+ helmets for motorcycles;

* hotel accommodation; and

* restaurant services (except alcoholic beverages).

A super-reduced rate of 6% is applicable, among others, to:
* certain pharmaceutical products;

+ books;

* newspapers;

+ magazines;

+ theatre tickets; and

+ electricity and natural gas.

A second super reduced rate of 4% applies to services for adjusting public buildings or private ones serving
the public interest to the needs of persons with disabilities.

The above rates are reduced by 30% (i.e. 16%, 9% 4% and 3% respectively) when they apply to transactions
occurring in the Aegean islands of Leros, Lesbos, Samos, Kos, Chios. The reduction applies for as long as
there are immigration centers in these islands, The reduction does not apply to means of transport and tobacco
products.

Greece | 259

--- Page 76 ---
Te Exemptions

7.1 Exemptions with right to deduction (zero rate)

Greek VAT law provides for a zero rate on certain transactions while at Lhe sume time the deduction of the

input VAT incurred for these transactions is allowed. These transactions include amongst others:

+ exports and intra-Community supplies;

+ supplies and hiring of certain categories of vessels and aircrafts, supplies of goods for the fuelling and
provisioning thereof, supplies of goods incorporated or used therein, and certain related services:

+ supply of goods under diplomatic and consular arrangements, supply of goods and services to
international bodies and their members;

+ transport of persons by sea or air from Greece to abroad and vice versa;

* services related to exports of goods;

+ — supplies of goods under suspending customs regimes or VAT warehousing arrangements;

+ supplies of goods and services to taxable persons, European and international organizations, embassies
and charitable organizations, which further donate them to specific public or non-profit entities to cover
refugees’ needs;

+ supplies of goods and services to taxable persons, which further donate them to specific public bodies and
entities to cover the needs of affected persons from extreme natural phenomena; and

+ supplies of goods and services to a donor, who is using such supplies in the context of a donation
agreement with a public sector body, provided the donation agreement is ratified by law or approved by
the Minister of Finance and the competent Minister as the case may be, depending on the type of donation
and the value of such supplies does not exceed the amount of the donation,

7.1.1 Intra-Community supplies

In relation to intra~Community supplies conducted by Greek suppliers, the latter should possess the
documents prescribed in Council Implementing Regulation 2018/1912, in order to substantiate the exemption
(zero rate). The Greek VAT Act does not require an invoice when goods are transferred to another EU
Member State. However, in practice, taxable persons issue pro-forma invoices.

7.1.2 Export supplies

In regards to exports conducted by Greek suppliers, in order to substantiate the exemption (zero rate), the

latter must have:

+ the customs export declaration;

+ the sales invoice;

+  aprintout of the electronic message of the customs office of export confirming the completion of the
respective export (i.e. message with code number “IE599”); and

+ bank documents verifying that the consideration has been paid.

7.1.3 Warehousing

7.1.3.1 VAT warehouse

Greek VAT law provides for the operation of VAT warehouses. In this respect, an exemption from VAT is
provided for the supplies and intra-Community acquisitions of goods that are intended to be placed in VAT
warehouses and the supply of related services, as well as the supplies of goods and related services when the
goods remain in VAT warehouses. VAT warehouses are operated by persons who are specifically licensed

for such operations. Furthermore, persons other than the above operators may be licensed to receive goods
that are intended to be placed in a VAT warehouse. There are many types of goods that can be placed in a
VAT warehouse (see also Annex V of the EU VAT Directive) which are specifically stated in Greek VAT law.
Further types of goods may be eligible by a decision of the Greek Minister of Finance. There are various
procedural and bookkeeping obligations that need to be kept for the proper placement of the goods in the VAT
warehouse and the proper application of the VAT exemption.

VAT becomes payable at the time the goods are released from the VAT warehouse. The operator of the
warehouse or the taxable person who has placed the goods in the warehouse is liable to pay the VAT due. If
the release of the goods from the warehouse is made by another taxable person, then this person is liable for
the VAT due. The operator of the warehouse is jointly liable for payment of the VAT.

260 | Greece

--- Page 77 ---
7.1.3.2 Special VAT warehouses for non-EU and domestic goods

Greek law provides for a special VAT warehousing scheme allowing the suspension of VAT on non-EU and
domestic goods that are intended for export, zero-rated intra-Community supply or supply to vessels and
aircrafts (to the extent such supply qualifies for an exemption from Greek VAT). The application of the said
scheme, which allows the suspension of VAT on imported goods that are stored in the VAT warehouse and
the domestic sale of stored goods requires, among others, the issuance of a special license in the name of the
warehouse keeper and the payment of an amount of EUR 600 (corresponding to administrative expenses for
the audit of the VAT warehouses) on an annual basis. Furthermore, a financial guarantee of at least 30% of
the amount of VAT that corresponds to the value of the stored goods is required. It is noted that the afore-
mentioned special warehousing scheme does not apply to excise goods.

7.1.3.3 Excise warehouses

There are no special warehouses for excise goods. Excise goods may be stored in a bonded warehouse
(paragraph 7.1.3.4).

7.1.3.4 Bonded (customs) warehouse

Greek VAT law provides for the operation of bonded (customs) warehouses, among others for goods subject
to excise duties. There are various types of such warehouses for the operation of which a relevant license

is required by the customs authorities. Such a license is granted upon provision, among other things, of a
guarantee by the operator of the warehouse. For the placement of the goods in the warehouse, a customs
declaration is filed with the proper customs authorities. The proper operation of the bonded (customs)
warehouse is closely monitored by the customs authorities and provided that such operation is compliant with
all customs requirements, the sale of goods in a bonded warehouse is zero-rated.

Furthermore, the supply of services that are closely related to goods that are placed in bonded warehouses is
exempt from VAT.

7.2 Exemptions without right to deduction

Greek VAT law provides for the exemption of certain supplies which are specifically enumerated therein,
without entitling the person supplying them to deduct the input VAT incurred for these supplies.

Exemptions in the public interest

More specifically, the following are such exemptions:
the supply of hospital and medical care, and diagnostic services and the supply of goods and services
closely related thereto, undertaken by State bodies. The services provided by thermal bath and spring
facilities are also included. The exemption in question applies also to private entities, provided that they
are non-profit and such exemption does not cause distortion of competition;

+ medical care supplied in the exercise of the medical professions, as well as the supply of services of
psychologists, midwives, nurses and physiotherapists, speech and occupational therapists;

+ services supplied by dental technicians and the supply of dental prostheses by dentists and dental
technicians;

+ services supplied by unions or associations of persons to their members, whose activities are exempt from
or outside the scope of VAT, to the extent these services are directly necessary for the exercise of their
activity and are provided against contribution to the joint expenses;

+ the supply of services and goods closely linked to welfare and social security, as well as to the protection
of children and young persons by legal persons governed by public law or other organizations or
institutions recognized by the State;

+ the transportation of sick or injured people with vehicles especially designed or adapted for this purpose,
under the condition that a relevant approval has been provided by the proper public authority;

+ the provision of education in general and the supply of goods and services closely related thereto by
public educational entities or by other persons that have been recognized by the proper authority; and

+ the supply of services closely linked to sport or physical education by non-profit legal persons to persons
taking part in sport or physical education.

Greece | 261

--- Page 78 ---
Other exemptions

+ supply of postal services services and the supply of goods incidental thereto;

+ the activities of the national radio and television networks, other than those of a commercial nature;

* reciprocal contributions paid to Land Reclamation Works Organizations by their members in respect of
the supply of irrigation water and other supplies directly linked to such activities;

+ the supply of human organs, blood and milk;

* tuition given privately by teachers at all cducational levels;

+ the supply of services and the supply of goods closely linked thereto, to their members, in return for a
contribution, by non-profit legal persons and organizations with aims of a political, trade-union, religious,
philosophical, philanthropic or patriotic nature, provided that this exemption is not likely to cause
distortion of competition;

+ the supply of services of a cultural nature and the supply of goods closely linked thereto, by legal bodies
or other organizations or institutions of a non-profit nature which have cultural purposes, provided
that this exemption is not likely to cause distortion of competition. Such services include admission to
museums, and archaeological sites, as well as the organization of art exhibitions and lectures;

+ the supply of staff by legal bodies of a religious or philosophical character aiming at spiritual welfare and
development;

+ insurance and reinsurance transactions including related services performed by insurance brokers and
insurance agents, including road assistance services;

+ transactions, including negotiation, concerning currency, hank notes and coins, used as legal tender with
the exception of coins and bank notes for collectors;

+ transactions, including negotiation, except safekeeping and management, in shares of Societies Anonymes
(S.A), interests in companies, debentures and other securities, excluding documents establishing title to
goods;

+ management of UCITS and other organizations of collective investments which aim at collecting
investment capital from the public;

+» the granting and negotiation of credit and the management thereof by the person granting it;

* the undertaking of obligations, personal or financial guarantees and other securities, the negotiation for
the undertaking of such transactions and the management of credit guarantees by the person granting the
guarantees;

+ transactions, including negotiation, concerning deposits and current accounts, payments, transfer of
deposits and remittances, claims, credit titles, cheques and other negotiable instruments, but excluding
debt collection and factoring;

* the lease of immovable property, including short-term leases in the context of sharing economy when
the lessor is a private individual, rents up to two properties and provides no other services except for bed
linen upon arrival of the guests;

+ betting, lotteries and the forms of gambling specifically defined by the relevant legislation;

«the supply at face value of postage stamps currently in circulation, fiscal stamps and other stamps used for
social security purposes, other than those intended for collections;

«the transfer of goods or a business as a going concer, in its totality, sectors or parts of a business, with
or without consideration, or in the form of contribution to existing or new legal persons, concerning
an activity wholly exempt from or falling outside the scope of VAT or by a farmer of the special flat-
rate scheme, where no right of deduction has been provided or exercised in respect of the goods being
transferred, as well as the supply of goods for which the VAT law does not allow the deduction of input
VAT;

+ the supply of immovable property that is not subject to VAT according to Greek VAT law (the supply
of new buildings before first occupation and the land on which they stand is subject to VAT; as new
buildings qualify those for which the respective building permit has been issued after 1 January 2006);

+ the supply of new buildings for a period of 5 years i.e. from 1 January 2020 until 31 December 2024; the
exemption is optional, upon filing of a relevant application of the owner who sells them; and

+ the revenues of casinos from games that are allowed to be played therein.

However, in case of insurance or financial transactions, the right to deduction exists to the extent the customer
is established outside the EU or these transactions relate to the export of goods.

262 | Greece

--- Page 79 ---
7.3 Option for taxation

In relation to all exempt transactions above, the option for taxation exists only in relation to commercial
leases of buildings. To this end, the lessor must submit a relevant application to the tax office prior to entering
into the lease agreement, when it concerns a new building or at any time if the building is not new. The
standard VAT rate applies to leases that are subject to VAT.

8. Liability

8.1 Reverse charge

In Greece there is the obligatory reverse charge rule for general B2B services provided by non-resident
suppliers to taxable persons and legal entities with a Greek VAT ID number established in Greece. This
reverse charge applies in all EU Member States and follows from Art. 44 and Art. 196 EU VAT Directive. The
reverse charge applies also in Greece for the supply of natural gas and electricity supplied by non-resident
suppliers to “taxable dealers”,

8.1.1 General reverse charge mechanism — non-resident suppliers (Article 194 EU VAT Directive)

In case a non-resident supplier effects taxable supplies of goods or services in Greece, the reverse charge
mechanism is not applicable and the non-resident supplier needs to VAT register, regardless of whether the
customer is a Greek or foreign taxable or non-taxable person. However, if the non-resident supplier does not
VAT register, then the customer becomes liable to account for the Greek VAT due, provided that the customer
is established in Greece and he is a taxable person. Namely, although the non-resident supplier is required to
VAT register in the first place, in case he does not do so, the reverse charge mechanism becomes applicable
as a consequence, The application of the reverse charge mechanism in such a case is obligatory and concerns
all transactions for which the non-resident supplier should have VAT registered in Greece and did not do so.
In case however the non-resident supplier has not VAT registered and therefore the reverse charge becomes
applicable, as per the practice of Greek tax authorities, he will not be able to recover any VAT incurred in
Greece through the procedure of Directive 2008/9/EC.

In addition to the above, the reverse charge mechanism is also applicable in case of a domestic supply of
goods that have been imported in Greece by a supplier which holds an import VAT deferral license (or

belongs to a group that holds such license), as explained in paragraph 2.3.2.1 above. In such case, the invoice
of the supplier must make the following reference: “Application of reverse charge mechanism. Decision POL
1126/2013. Import VAT deferral license No

8.1.2 Reverse charge mechanism — specific domestic rules (Article 199 EU VAT Directive)

Greek VAT law provides for the application of the reverse charge mechanism to domestic transactions in the

following instances:

+ supply of used material, used material which cannot be re-used in the same state, scrap, industrial and
non-industrial waste, recyclable waste and incompletely processed waste;

+ transfer of greenhouse gas emission allowances;

+ domestic supply of goods imported by persons holding an import VAT deferral license referred to in
paragraph 2.3.2.1 above. See also paragraph 8.1.1;

* technical projects performed for Greek public authorities and State-governed organizations, which are
taxable persons with the right to deduct input VAT, with the exception of major projects falling within the
scope of article 100 of Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
17 December 2013 and article 39 of Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006 i.e. projects funded by the
European Regional Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund for which the total eligible cost exceeds
EUR 50,000,000 and in the case of projects promoting sustainable transport and removing bottlenecks in
key network infrastructures where the total eligible cost exceeds EUR 75,000,000;

+ the supply of goods and services to taxable persons established in Greece whose activity consists of the
transport of natural gas through pipelines, to the extent that such goods/services are exclusively intended
for the construction of the said pipelines; and

+ the supply of mobile phones, game consoles, tablets and laptops to taxable persons established in Greece
who have the right to deduct input VAT.

Greece | 263

--- Page 80 ---
8.2 Joint and several liability

Jointly liable for VAT debts are the executive presidents, directors, general directors, administrators,
managing directors and liquidators and any other persons having managing pawers, provided that:

+ the above persons had the above capacities either during the operation of the legal entity or at the time of
its dissolution, termination or merger, or during its liquidation;

* the debts became overdue during their office; and

«the debt was created due to the fault of the above persons.

In case of VAT assessments made following an audit, jointly liable are the persons for which the first and third
of the above conditions are fulfilled, in the fiscal year to which the VAT assessment refers.

For non-Greek taxable persons who are VAT registered in Greece, through the appointment of a fiscal
representative, the latler is jointly liable for the VAT debts of the foreign taxable person.

9 Recovery of input VAT

o1 Non-recoverable input VAT

Input VAT is not recoverable in case of

+ purchase, importation or intra~Community acquisition of tobacco products;

+ purchase, importation or intra-Community acquisition of spirits or alcoholic beverages, provided that the
aforementioned goods are used for the purposes of non-taxable transactions;

* reception, entertainment and hospitality expenses;

+ accommodation, food, beverage, transport and entertainment expenses for the staff or the representatives
of a company; and

+ purchase, importation or intra-Community acquisition of private use passenger cars up to 9 seats,
motorcycles and motorbikes, vessels and aircrafts that are used for recreational or sports purposes and
expenses in relation to petrol, repair, maintenance, leasing and circulation thereof in general (VAT is
deductible, however, when the aforementioned transport means are intended for sale, leasing or transport
of persons against a fare).

92 Excess input VAT

Taxable persons who are registered in Greece for VAT purposes are entitled to apply for the refund of any
excess input VAT at any time, including immediately after the filing of the VAT return in which the relevant
excess input VAT has been declared.

Following the filing of the VAT refund claim by the taxable person, the tax administration performs a risk

analysis, in order to determine if the refund claims for which the refund should be made without a prior audit

and those refund claims for which an audit should be performed prior to the refund. Furthermore, for amounts

of refund exceeding EUR 300,000, the prior approval of the Minister or Deputy Minister of Finance is

required. The following taxable persons are considered to raise low risk and therefore their refund claims are

processed with priority and usually without prior audit:

+ taxable persons who have an Authorised Economic Operator license; and

+ taxable persons who perform zero rated transactions and-or services subject to the reverse charge which
turnover exceeds 50% of the total turnover.

In any case, according to the Greek Tax Procedures Code, if the refund of taxes, including VAT, is made after
90 days from the filing of the refund claim, the taxable person is entitled to interest.

9.3 Adjustment periods

+ immovable property - 3 years following the year of first use;
+ movable property - 5 years following the year of first use.

264 | Greece

--- Page 81 ---
However, in the case of immovable property which is leased and for such lease the option has been exercised
to be subject to VAT, the adjustment period is 10 years from the year of first use.

Certain services consisting in the right to use patents, drawings, templates, trademarks and similar rights also
qualify as capital goods according to Greek VAT law, to the extent they are used for more than one accounting
period.

94 VAT refund to EU taxable persons

‘Non-resident EU taxable persons may apply for the refund of VAT incurred in Greece under the conditions
and requirements of Directive 2008/9/EC. More specifically, the said taxable persons may file a relevant
refund claim with the designated website of the tax authorities of their country of establishment. The latter
will forward electronically the application to the Greek Independent Authority for Public Revenue, which
notifies the applicant electronically of the date of receipt of the refund claim.

‘The VAT refund claim must be accompanied by an electronic file (of maximum size SMb), containing
scanned copies of the relevant invoices, with a minimum value of EUR 250 for invoices concerning fuel
expenses and EUR 1,000 for invoices concerning all other expenses.

The aforementioned refund claims of EU taxable persons must be filed by 30 September of the calendar year
that follows the refund period (which shall not be more than one calendar year or less than 3 calendar months;
it may be less than 3 months only if it concerns the remainder of a calendar year). VAT is not refunded in case
of claims that are submitted after the lapse of the deadline, In case of refund claims filed for a period of one
calendar year, the requested VAT cannot be lower than EUR 50. In case of refund claims filed for a period of
less than one calendar year, the requested VAT cannot be lower than EUR 400.

In the event the refund claim is duly filed, the Greek Ministry of Finance must issue a decision within a
deadline of 4 months, starting from the date the claim is received. The said deadline may be extended under
conditions but, in any case, it cannot exceed 8 months from the date of receipt of the claim. Subsequently,
in the event the refund claim is approved, the refund must take place before a deadline of 10 working days,
starting from the expiration of the deadline set for the Greek Independent Authority for Public Revenue to
decide on the claim.

In case the refund claim of an EU applicant is rejected, the latter may file an administrative appeal for the
re-examination of its claim. The said appeal must be filed with the Dispute Resolution Directorate of the
Independent Authority for Public Revenue within 60 days after the notification of the rejection, or after the
deadline for the issuance of a written decision on the claim, as the case may be. The Directorate should issue
a decision within 120 days after the filing of the said appeal. In case of a rejecting decision, or if no written
decision is issued before the deadline, the EU taxable person is entitled to file a judicial appeal (before the
administrative courts) within a 90 day period starting from the notification of the rejecting decision or from
the lapse of the deadline for the issuance of a decision.

Finally, see paragraph 9.1 for the Greek VAT which is not refundable.

95 VAT refund to non-EU taxable persons

In the case of non-resident non-EU taxable persons, the refund of VAT incurred in Greece is also possible to
the extent the reciprocity principle is fulfilled. Until now, the Greek Ministry of Finance has issued circulars
explicitly providing that the VAT is refunded to taxable persons established in Switzerland, Norway and

the UK. In practice VAT may be refunded to taxable persons in any other country as well, provided that the
reciprocity principle is fulfilled. To this end, a relevant (hard copy) application must be filed with the Greek
Ministry of Finance. The application must be accompanied by the original invoices and a certificate of the
competent authorities of the applicant’s country of establishment, stating that the latter is a taxable person for
VAT purposes in that country.

In the event the refund claim is filed by another person, a Power of Attorney for his appointment must also be
submitted together with the refund claim.

Greece | 265

--- Page 82 ---
‘The refund claims of non-resident non-EU taxable persons, must be filed by 30 September of the calendar
year that follows the refund period (which shall not be more than one calendar year or less than 3 calendar
months). It may be less than 3 months only if it concerns the remainder of a calendar year. VAT is not
refunded in case of claims that are submitted after the lapse of the deadline.

In the event the refund claim is duly filed, the Greek Ministry of Finance must issue a relevant decision
within a deadline of 4 months, starting from the date the claim was received. The said deadline may be
extended under conditions but, in any case, it cannot exceed 8 months from the date of receipt of the claim.
Subsequently, in the event the refund claim is approved, the refund must take place within a period of 10
working days, starting from the expiration of the deadline set for the Greck Ministry of Finance to decide on
the claim.

In case the refund claim of a non-EU applicant is rejected, the latter may file an administrative appeal for
the re-examination of its claim. The said appeal must be filed with the Dispute Resolution Directorate of the
Ministry of Finance within 60 days after the notification of the relevant rejection, or after the lapse of the
deadline for the issuance of a written decision on the claim. The Directorate should issue a decision within
120 days after the filing of said appeal. In case of a rejecting decision, or if no written decision is issued
before the deadline, the non-EU applicant is entitled to file a judicial appeal (before the administrative courts)
within a 90-day period starting from the notification of the rejecting decision or from the lapse of the deadline
for the issuance of a decision.

Finally, see paragraph 9.1 for the Greek VAT which is not refundable.

10. Admi

istrative obligations

10.1 Invoicing

10.1.1 Invoice content

Greek tax law does not provide for the issuance of separate commercial and VAT invoices but requires the

issuance of a single invoice. Invoices issued in Greece must mention the following details:

+ the date of issuance of the invoice;

+ the sequential number of the invoice;

+ the full details of the supplier and the customer (name or trade name, address, tax registration (VAT)
number);

+ the type and quantity of the goods sold or the description of the services rendered;

+ the measurement unit as well as the price per unit;

+ the date when the supply of the respective goods or services was realized or completed, to the extent such
date does not coincide with the date of issue of the invoice;

+ the price of the goods or the service remuneration per VAT rate or per VAT exemption;

* discounts or rebates granted;

+ the applicable VAT rate;

+ the VAT amount payable, unless a special VAT scheme is applicable, according to which such reference is
not required;

+ where the invoice is issued by the recipient of the respective goods or services the reference “self-billing”
should be inserted (in Greek “Avt6-tyLoAdynoy”);

+ where the customer is liable to pay the VAT due (by application of the reverse charge mechanism) the
reference “reverse charge” should be inserted (in Greek “Avtiotpogn emBépvvon”);

+ where a VAT exemption is applicable, reference should be made to the relevant provision of Greek VAT
law or the EU VAT Directive providing for such exemption; for instance for intra-community supplies
the reference in Greek is “AmaAAGooetai and MTIA Gp8po 33 tov Kade PIA” while for exports the
reference in Greek is “AzakAécoerar and PITA dépOpo 29 tov Kaduca DILA”;

+ where a special VAT scheme is applicable, reference should be made on the invoice that this scheme
is applicable; for instance, the reference in Greek for travel agents scheme is “KaBectig nepiupiov-
TakiSuotuxé mpaxtopeta” and for second hand goods is “KaGeotac nepWapiov- Metazerpicpéve oad”;

266 | Greece

--- Page 83 ---
+ incase of intra-Community supply of a new means of transport, reference should be made to the
characteristics according to which the means of transport qualifies as new; for instance, in case of a
vessel, the date of such vessel’s entry into service and the hours it has sailed;

+ in the event the invoice is issued by a foreign entity in respect of taxable transactions in Greece for which
itis liable for Greek VAT, a reference must be made to the VAT number that has been acquired in Greece;
and

+ when a fiscal representative is liable for VAT, the invoice must mention the full details and tax registration
number of the representative.

The invoices can be issued in any language, but the tax authorities have the right to ask for a translation.
‘Therefore, an invoice issued by a Greek company could be in English and, therefore contain (e.g.) the
reference “reverse charge” in English.

10.1.2 Time limits

The time limits for the issuance of invoices depend on the type of transactions that are being invoiced.
Indicatively:

* in the event ofa supply of goods or services, the relevant invoice must be issued by the 15 day of the month
that follows the supply, the dispatch of the goods or the completion of the services, as the case may be; and

+ inthe event of a supply of goods or services that is continuous, the invoice is issued by the 15" day of the
month that follows the date when part of the consideration becomes due.

10.1.3 Currency
Invoices may be issued in any currency, however the amount of VAT due must be expressed in EUR.

10.1.4 Conversion and exchange rate
Greek tax law refers to Article 91 of the EU VAT Directive, as regards the conversion to EUR of the amount of

VAT expressed on an invoice in a different currency. In this respect, the exchange rate used is that published by
the Central European Bank and no notification needs to be made to this end by the taxable person.

10.1.5 Self-billing
Under Greek tax legislation, self-billing is allowed, provided that a relevant agreement is in place between the
2 parties, which may be proved by any suitable means. In the event of self-billing, the relevant invoices to be
issued must fulfil all the conditions that apply to regular invoices according to Greek legislation.

10.1.6 Simplified invoice

A simplified invoice must contain the following information:

+ the date of the issuance of the invoice;

+ the full details of the supplier;

+ description of the goods or services supplied; and

+ the amount of VAT due or the information necessary for its calculation.

The simplified invoice is allowed to be issued when the amount invoiced does not exceed EUR 100.

10.1.7 Storage of invoices

Accounting books and fiscal documents, including invoices, must be retained for a period of at least 6 years
from the year of reference. However, in cases specifically provided in the law, the period may be extended
e.g. when information has been requested from another country or if the taxable person files an amending tax
return in the last year of the retention period.

If tax litigation is pending before the administrative courts, the accounting books and fiscal documents must
be maintained throughout the period during which the tax litigation is pending and one year after the issuance
of the irrevocable court decision.

Invoices should be stored in paper or in electronic form. Invoices may be stored in Greece or abroad. In any
case, the taxable person has the requirement to give access to the stored invoices to the tax authorities, within
the deadlines set by the tax authorities and without unreasonable delay.

Greece | 267

--- Page 84 ---
10.1.8 Electronic invoicing

Electronic invoicing is allowed under Greek lax law, provided that the authenticity of the origin, integrity of
the content and the readability of the invoices are guaranteed by any suitable means. The use of electronic
invoices is subject to the acceptance of the customer.

10.2 VAT compliance

10.2.1. VAT return period

Greek established taxable persons that maintain double entry accounting books are required to file VAT
returns monthly. Greek established taxable persons that maintain single entry (revenues-expenses) accounting
books, are required to file VAT returns quarterly. Foreign taxable persons that are VAT registered in Greece
are also required to file VAT returns quarterly. VAT returns may only be filed electronically and should be
filed regardless of whether there is VAT payable, credit VAT balance, or the returns are nil.

10.2.2 Filing of a VAT return and payment

VAT returns should be filed by the last working day of the month that follows the respective VAT return
period, as defined in paragraph 10.2.1 above.

VAT due can be paid in lump sum by the last working day of the month when the VAT return should be filed.
Alternatively, to the extent the amount of VAT due exceeds EUR 100, it can be paid in 2 equal instalments.
‘The first one must be paid by the last working day of the month of filing of the VAT return and the second one
by the last working day of the following month. The website through which VAT returns are filed is:
Attps://tinyurl.com/4294ttdd

10.2.3 European sales listing

The European sales listing must be submitted on a monthly basis, by the 26% day of the following month,
only however, for those months in which intra-Community transactions have taken place and regardless of the
value of the intra-Community transactions. More specifically, the European sales listing is filed to declare the
realization of:

+ intra-Community supplies of goods;

+ intra-Community acquisitions of goods;

+ — supply of (reverse charge) services to taxable persons established in different EU Member States to the
extent that the services provided are subject to VAT in the EU Member State of the recipient; and

+ receipt of (reverse charge) services from taxable persons established in different EU Member States to the
extent that such services are subject to VAT in Greece.

The website for the filing of the European sales listing is: huips://tinyurl.com/4294ttdd
10.2.4 National recapitulative statement

Taxable persons are not required to file annual lists of their suppliers and customers.
10.2.5 Tax assessment period

For VAT purposes, the tax assessment period is in principle 6 years (starting from the end of the year of
reference). By way of exception from the above rule, the said period may bc extended up to 11 years, as the
case may be, when special conditions apply.

10.3 Penalties

10.3.1 Default penalties for late registration
Late registration triggers a penalty of EUR 100.
10.3.2 Default penalties for not filing a VAT return or a European sales listing on time

The late filing of VAT retums, when no VAT is payable, triggers a fixed penalty of EUR 100. This fixed
penalty is also applicable in case of late filing of the European sales listing.

268 | Greece

--- Page 85 ---
In case VAT is payable and the VAT return is filed with delay, then a fixed penalty of EUR 250 or EUR S00 is
imposed, depending on the type of accounting books maintained.

10.3.3 Default penalties for not paying VAT on time to the tax authorities

If the VAT is not paid on time to the tax authorities, then interest is calculated on the amount of the VAT due
from the next day following the deadline for the payment of the VAT. The interest rate is 8.76% annually
(0.73% monthly).

10.3.4 Default penalties for VAT assessments when VAT is not reported correctly
In case an assessment is made by the tax authorities in the context of an audit, and the taxable person is found

to have filed inaccurate VAT returns and as a result he has paid less VAT than the VAT actually due or he has
deducted or received a refund for a higher amount of VAT, a penalty of 50% of the difference is imposed.

Furthermore, the interest mentioned in paragraph 10.3.3 is also applicable.

In case an audit has been initiated, until the 10" day from the issuance of the preliminary audit report, the
taxable person has the right to file VAT returns (for the first time or amending to previously filed ones). In
such case the above penalty is reduced by 50 % thereof, while the interest mentioned in paragraph 10.3.3 is
also applicable.

In case the taxpayer accepts the VAT assessment after the final audit report has been issued and before the
deadline expires for the filing of an administrative appeal, the penalty is reduced by 40%. In case the taxpayer
accepts the VAT assessment after the issuance of a decision on the administrative appeal (or the expiration

of the deadline for such issuance) and before the expiration of the deadline for filing a judicial appeal, the
penalty is reduced by 30%, whereas if the acceptance is made after the filing of the judicial appeal and before
the first hearing set, the penalty is reduced by 25%.

10.3.5 Offence penalties

In case of non-filing of a VAT return, where the VAT return that was not filed would give rise to the obligation
for payment of an amount of VAT (i) a penalty equal to 50% of such amount or (ii) a fixed penalty of EUR
250 or EUR 500 (depending on the type of accounting books maintained) is applicable, whichever of the two
is higher, Also the interest mentioned in paragraph 10.3.3 is applicable.

In case of failure to issue fiscal documents or issuance/receipt of inaccurate fiscal documents with respect to
transactions that ate subject to VAT, a penalty is imposed equal to 50% of the corresponding VAT or of the
respective difference. This penalty cannot be lower, per tax audit, than EUR 250 or EUR 500 (depending on
the type of accounting books maintained).

10.4 Intrastat

Intrastat returns are filed on a monthly basis, by the 26" day of the following month, however only for the
months in which intra-Community supplies or acquisitions have taken place (including distance sales) and
to the extent that the value of such transactions exceeds the thresholds mentioned below in paragraph 10.4.1,
either in the previous year or within the year of reference. Such returns are filed electronically with the
Hellenic Statistical Authority (EL.STAT),

10.4.1 Intrastat threshold
The Intrastat threshold for 2025 is EUR 200,000 for arrivals and EUR 90,000 for dispatches.
10.4.2 Intrastat data to be reported

Intrastat returns should include the following information in relation to the arrivals and dispatches:
+ the BU Member State of departure/destination;

+ the nature of the transaction;

+ the mode of transport;

+ the 8-digit combined nomenclature (CN) code of reported goods;

* net weight of reported goods;

Greece | 269

--- Page 86 ---
* invoiced value of the goods;
statistical value of the goods;

+ the VAT number of the customer; and
+ the country of origin.

10.5 Additional compliance requirements

Taxable persons who are subject to local accounting requirements have to provide VAT and accounting
information to the myDATA public portal. The myDATA system is an ¢-accounting system which also
includes reporting obligations to be fulfilled either periodically or on a real-time basis. It requires taxable
persons to provide a set of data to a public platform, which are then used to maintain online tax ledgers.
This system covers all transactions (B2B, B2C and B2G) and both domestic and international transactions.
‘Taxable persons with a turnover lower than EUR 30,000 or issuing less than 50 invoices per year are able to
manually upload invoice data on the myDATA portal.

Information received from:

Alex Karopoulos (a.karopoulos@zeya.com),)
Zepos & Yannopoulos / www.zeya.com

270 | Greece

--- Page 87 ---
Hungary
The European Union (EU) VAT Directive is implemented through the “2007. évi CXXVIL torvény az
Altaldnos forgalmi adéré!”. VAT is referred to in Hungary as “altalanos forgalmiad6” or “AFA”.

i. Taxable Persons

Ll Registration threshold & SME scheme for domestic taxable persons

Taxable persons carrying out business activities must register for taxes in Hungary. There is no threshold for
registration. The general tax number is used as a VAT number except in intra~Community transactions, where
an additional EU VAT identification number must be shown.

Once a company, ic. taxable person, is registered at the Court of Registry, it receives its tax number
automatically. Nevertheless, a registration form detailing its tax status must be filed with the tax office local to
the domicile of the company. The EU VAT identification number must be requested on this form.

The possibility for a VAT exemption exists for small businesses if their supplies are under the threshold of
HUF 18 million (approximately EUR 45,375)', however, they still must register for VAT purposes.

‘The registration forms can be downloaded at: hitps://tinpurl.com/yhkuyf2z

1.2 Registration threshold & SME scheme for foreign taxable persons

Foreign taxable persons must register for ‘all taxes’ in Hungary. It is not possible to register for VAT only.
However, it is possible to indicate on the registration form if the taxable person is not liable for corporate
income tax or it is not liable for VAT. There is no registration threshold for foreign taxable persons that need
to register for VAT purposes in Hungary.

When registering, the following information must be provided:

+ aregistration form;

= accompany registration document not older than 30 days issued by the competent foreign authority, for
example company house (original or copy, no need to notarize);

+ evidence of registration as a taxpayer issued by the competent foreign authority: the original foreign tax
registration confirmation;

+ specimen signature or notarized copy of the passport (if it includes the signature) of the signatory officer.
Specimen signature must be 1) original, 2) notarized and 3) of the foreign company’s signatory officer
who is authorized to represent the Company as per the company’s registration document.

Only EU-based taxable persons or those that have a fixed establishment in the EU, can request direct
registration in Hungary. Non-EU taxable persons are required to appoint a fiscal representative when
registering for taxes (see also paragraph 1.4).

Foreign taxable persons should submit their registration form at a special tax office: NAV Kiemelt Ad6z6k
Igazgatosdga. The tax office has to complete the tax registration (if the documents are accepted) within 30
days.

NEMZETI ADO- ES VAMHIVATAL KIEMELT ADO- ES VAMIGAZGATOSAGA
Address: 1077 Budapest,D ob utca 75-81.

Postal address: 1410 Budapest,P f: 138.Hungary

+36 (1) 461-3300

I: navgov.iu

Fax: +36 (1) 461-3311

1 Exchange rates were calculated on 2 August 2024,
Hungary | 271

--- Page 88 ---
The registration forms can be downloaded at:
https://tinyurl.com/yhkuyf2z

From 1 January 2025, the so-called SME scheme (Special Scheme for Small Enterprises) was introduced,
which allows taxable persons established in the EU to opt for an exemption in a Member State where they
are not established. ‘The application of the scheme is subject to certain conditions, by registering only in the
Member State of establishment. A taxable person who has established its business in another EU member
state but is not established in Hungary may choose to apply the SME scheme.

For information about the rules on cross-border exemption, please visit the NAV website (nay.gov.bu) at
https://tinyurl.com/bdex85uz

Accordingly, the foreign taxable person may opt for the exemption (known as individual exemption) in Hungary
if, both in the current and the preceding calendar year, his consolidated turnover does not exceed the EU thresh-
old of EUR 100 000 and his domestic turnover does not exceed the domestic threshold of HUF 18 000 000.

A taxable person who opts for the individual exemption (SME scheme) has an obligation to declare and pay

tax in cases where he cannot act as an exempt person. This is the case, for example, where:

+ he sells goods used as capital goods in his business;

+ permanently transfers intangible assets or rights used in his business;

+ he supplies new means of transport to another EU Member State;

+ he sells new immovable property under construction or new immovable property, or building plot, even if
not considered as capital assets;

+ certain free of charge supplies, provided that the input tax relating thereto is wholly or partly deductible;

+ for certain cross-border transactions subject to the reverse charge;

+ he charges VAT on the invoice despite being tax exempt;

+ he is liable as a guarantor for the payment of the tax in the event of non-payment of the consideration;

+ for intra-Community acquisitions of goods with a value exceeding ZUR 10,000 (or you may opt to pay
below this threshold), and for intra-Community acquisitions of excisc goods and new means of transport
irrespective of the threshold; or

+ he imports goods.

In addition to the above-mentioned supplies, certain VAT exempt and transactions that fall under a special
agricultural scheme do not count for the individual exemption threshold.

13 VAT grouping

Taxable persons:

* who (that) have established their business inside the domestic territory or, in the absence of such a place
of business, have their permanent address or they usually reside inside the domestic territory; and

+ who (that) are considered affiliated,

may together enter into a group taxation arrangement.

A group taxation arrangement may be established subject to the state tax authority’s permission, granted upon,

an application submitted in writing and containing the express and unanimous understanding of all members

concerned. The group taxation arrangement is not available to any taxable person who holds membership

in another group taxation arrangement or has submitted an application to establish another group taxation

arrangement, where this application is pending the definitive decision.

“Affiliated company” is defined in the Corporate Income tax law. The Corporate Income law defines affiliated

company as follows:

+ the taxpayer and the person in which the taxpayer has a majority control - whether directly or indirectly -
according to the provisions of the Civil Code;

+ the taxpayer and the person that has majority control in the taxpayer - whether directly or indirectly -
according to the provisions of the Civil Code;

+ the taxpayer and another person if a third party has majority control in both the taxpayer and such other
person - whether directly or indirectly - according to the provisions of the Civil Code, where any close

272 | Hungary

--- Page 89 ---
relative holding a majority control in the taxpayer and the other person shall be recognized as third
parties;

+ anon-resident taxable person and his domestic business establishments, furthermore, the domestic place
of business of a non-resident taxable person and the person who maintains the relationship defined under
Paragraphs a)-c) with the non-resident taxable person;

+ the taxpayer and its foreign business establishment, and the taxpayer’s foreign business establishment and
the person who maintains the relationship defined under Paragraphs a)-c) with the taxpayer;

+ the taxpayer and another person if between them dominating influence is exercised relating to business
and financial policy having regard to the equivalence of management.

For the purposes of the VAT grouping, taxable persons shall not be treated collectively as affiliated
companies if the sole reason for their being recognized as affiliated is that the Hungarian State or a municipal
government has majority control in them, whether directly or indirectly, as a third party in accordance with
the Act on the Civil Code (hereinafter referred to as Civil Code). Municipal governments and any company
in which a municipal government has majority control, whether directly or indirectly, in accordance with the
Civil Code shall not be collectively recognized as affiliated.

‘The members of a VAT group keep their own tax numbers. However, they will receive one common separate
VAT number for the group. The members of a VAT group do not charge VAT on their supplies to other
members of the same VAT group. A VAT group files one VAT return monthly. The members are jointly and
severally liable for payment of the VAT debts of the group.

14 Fiscal representative

Taxable persons from EU Member States do not have to appoint a fiscal representative but they can do it
voluntarily. Taxable persons from non-EU countries are obliged to appoint a fiscal representative in order to
register and carry out business in Hungary. A fiscal representative should have a share capital of HUF 150
million (approximately EUR 384,000) and must have no fiscal debt. The fiscal representative must perform
every tax obligation on behalf of the foreign taxable person. He is jointly and severally liable for these
liabilities.

2 Taxable transaction

21 Transfer of business

‘The transfer of a line of business (transfer of a going concern) is considered to be out of the scope of VAT,
provided that the acquirer purchases the line of business for the purpose of carrying on the business and

both the transferor and transferee are VAT registered in Hungary and parties do not have a status that can
jeopardise the right of VAT deduction (for example they are subject to the SME scheme). The transferee
should undertake joint and several liability within the period of limitation. ‘Line of business’ shall mean an
existing unit of a company that is capable to function independently and to carry out economic activities on a
long term using its own assets.

2.2 Supplies free of charge

Supply of goods for consideration also means where a taxable person permanently disposes of goods forming
part of his business assets - without any compensation - for his own or his employees’ private use, more
generally, for purposes other than those of his business, or if supplied to others free of charge, where the VAT
on such goods or on its component was wholly or partly deductible by the taxable person.

Some other transactions are also considered to be taxable supplies even if made without consideration, if the

related input VAT was deductible, for example:

+ the application by a taxable person for the purposes of his business of goods produced, constructed,
extracted, processed, purchased or imported in the course of such business, where the VAT on such goods,
had they been acquired from another taxable person, would not be wholly deductible;

Hungary | 273

--- Page 90 ---
+ the application of goods by a taxable person for the purposes of a non-taxable area of activity, where the
VAT on such goods became wholly or partly deductible upon their acquisition or upon their application in
accordance with point.

The supply of goods for consideration shall not cover:

+ charitable donations; and

+ the supply of samples of goods and goods of small value free of charge by the taxable person for his
business purposes.

“Samples of goods” shall mean any component part or small quantity of a product that carries specific
characteristics of that product, whose sole purpose is to demonstrate the product in question, and that is not
suitable for long-term use or for other objectives due to its physical substance or value.

“Small value” shall mean anything of value worth less than HUF 5,000, where the value is to be determined
relying on the open market value of the goods provided - inclusive of VAT - prevailing at the time when
provided.

“Charitable donation” shall mean goods and services made available to public-benefit organizations for
supporting their activities performed in the public interest provided for in the relevant legislation, or to
educational establishments supporting their activities specified in the charter document, and, furthermore,
to the ecclesiastical legal entities that satisfy the requirements to support the activities described therein,
provided that:

* the true contents of the documents pertaining to the transaction in question and the actual circumstances
of such transaction confers sufficient proof that such action does not serve or only seemingly serves the
public purpose or public interest, the activities of educational establishments specified in the charter
document, or the objective defined in the relevant legislation in the case of ecclesiastical legal entities;

* such donation does not result in any financial advantage for the donor, its members (shareholders), its
executive officers, any member of its board of directors or board of supervisors, its auditor, or close
relatives of such persons or private individual members (shareholders), whereby any reference to the
name or to the activities of the donor shall not be regarded as financial advantage; and

* the donor has a certificate made out by the public-benefit organization, educational establishment or the
ecclesiastical legal entity that contains the name of the donor and the recipient, their registered address
or home address, tax number, or in the absence of a tax number their unique identifier and the objective
supported.

Supply of services for consideration also means where a taxable person temporarily disposes of goods
forming part of his business assets - without any compensation - for his own or his employees’ private use,
more generally, for purposes other than those of his business, or if transferred to others free of charge, where
the VAT on such goods, or on its component, was wholly or partly deductible by the taxable person. Supply of
services for consideration shall also mean the supply of services carried out free of charge by a taxable person
for his private use or for that of his staff or, more generally, for purposes other than those of his business,
where the VAT on such services was wholly or partly deductible by the taxable person.

Supply of services for consideration shall not cover the provision of charitable donations. Charitable
donations are out of scope of VAT. However, the definition of such donations is very restricted.

2.3. Importation

2.3.1 Importation followed by an intra-Community supply

It is possible to apply an exemption on the importation of goods into Hungary if it is followed by an intra-

‘Community supply. Certain conditions must be met in order to apply the exemption (so-called “Procedure 42”):

+ the goods must be transported out of the country within 30 days (this deadline can be extended by 30
days);

+ asecurity must be provided;

274 | Hungary

--- Page 91 ---
+ the goods may not be used in Hungary; and
+ the importer or its representative has a VAT registration number.

2.3.2 Postponed accounting on importation

Generally, import VAT is levied by HTA in Hungary. Under the general rules import VAT is due at the time of
the import. This import VAT is deductible in the VAT period of the import.

Import VAT deferment license. Under special circumstances taxable persons can apply for a license to avoid
payment of VAT at the time of importation but pay and reclaim import VAT in the Hungarian VAT retum.

‘The conditions for applying the deferment of VAT upon importation are as follows:

+ the applicant is registered for tax (VAT) in Hungary;

+ the applicant has a clean record with the customs authorities; and

+ the volume of the exempt sale of goods with the right to recover VAT (for instance in case of exports or
intra-Community supplies) is at least 67% of the total supplies in the year but with a minimum of HUF
10 billion (approximately EUR 25,200,000); or

+ the volume of the tax exempt sale of goods in the current year is at least HUF 20 billion (approximately
EUR 50,400,000); or

+ the applicant has obtained an authorized economic operator (AEO) license or is authorized to apply the
simplified procedure.

Import through an indirect customs representative. If the importer appoints an indirect customs
representative, the latter will become liable to pay import VAT. If the indirect customs representative has an
import VAT deferment license, he pays import VAT in his own VAT return (deferred import VAT payment).

Subject to further conditions, the importer can also assign the right to deduct import VAT to the indirect
customs representative. In this case the indirect customs representative with the deferment license can pay
and recover import VAT in his own VAT return even if the importer does not have the import VAT deferment
license. From | March 2025 the conditions for the indirect customs representative being able to self-assess
and deduct import VAT became stricter and include the requirement of reliable taxpayer status for the indirect
customs representative and reliable or non-risky taxpayer status for the importer. If the importer is not
considered risky, but also not considered a reliable taxpayer, the indirect customs representative must perform
additional checks on the importer as prescribed by the HTA.

HTA grants businesses “reliable taxpayer status” after three years of tax compliant operation in Hungary.
Certain non-compliant activity may result in the “risky taxpayer” status.

3. Place of supply

3.1 Consignment and call-off stock

The following joint conditions must be fulfilled in order to avoid the VAT registration of a foreign supplier in

Hungary:

+ both the supplier and the intended acquirer are taxable persons;

+ the goods are transported from one EU Member State to another with a view to being supplied there at a
later stage and after arrival to an intended acquirer;

+ the supplier has not established his business nor does he have a fixed establishment in the EU Member
State to which the goods are dispatched;

+ the supplier records the dispatch of the goods in its register and indicates the VAT identification number of
the intended acquirer in his European sales listing;

+ the intended acquirer is identified for VAT purposes in the EU Member State to which the goods are
transferred;

+ the intended acquirer’s identity and VAT identification number are known by the supplier at the time when
dispatch begins;

Hungary | 275

--- Page 92 ---
+ the intended acquirer is required to keep regularly updated quantitative records on the goods intended to
be sold to him from the call-off stock and indicate the VAT identification number of the supplier in his
European sales listing; and

+ asa time limit, the goods can remain no longer than 12 months under the call-off stock arrangements.

By applying the simplification, the supply of the foreign taxable person should be treated as an intra-
Community supply (without being followed by a domestic sale in Hungary thal would otherwise trigger the
need for VAT registration), while the purchase by the Hungarian customer is to be considered as an intra-
Community acquisition.

3.2 Installation supplies

The supply of goods with installation is treated as supplied where the goods are assembled or installed. In
Hungary, there is no formal definition of the notion ‘supply with installation or assembly’.

On the supply of goods with installation or assembly, the reverse charge may apply if the supplier is not
established and the customer is registered for VAT purposes in Hungary (see also paragraph 8.1.1).

33 Distance sales threshold

Distance selling refers to the sale of goods to private individuals in another EU Member State, where the
goods are transported from one Member State to another by or on behalf of the supplier. Hungary has a EUR
10,000 annual threshold for distance sales.

To simplify VAT compliance, businesses can use the One-Stop Shop (OSS) scheme. By registering for OSS
in one EU Member State, businesses can report and pay VAT on all their EU distance sales through a single
return, avoiding the need to register in multiple Member States. Once the threshold is exceeded or if the
business opts into the OSS scheme, the VAT rate applied is the rate of the Member State where the goods are
delivered. If distance sales to a Member State do not exceed the threshold, the supplier charges VAT at their
‘own country’s rate, unless they choose to opt into the OSS scheme.

OSS returns must be submitted on a quarterly basis. OSS filing should be done in Hungarian Forints (HUF),
The ECB exchange rate valid on the last day of the quarter should be used. Payments must be made in HUF
too.

Under the special arrangement for postal and courier services, the postal operator will declare and pay the
amount of VAT collected monthly. Postal operators making use of the special arrangements will be subject to
record-keeping obligations. The records to be held by them will contain all the taxable transactions, including
cases where the consignment was rejected by the customer. Under this simplified import VAT payment scheme,
a flat rate of 27% is applied to all cases, regardless of the actual VAT rate applicable to the imported goods.

3.4 Simplified triangulation rules

The triangulation simplification allows for the party participating in the intra-Community chain supply
of goods to be exempted from the obligation to register for VAT in Hungary and charge Hungarian VAT.
The simplification usually involves three parties, party A (supplier who dispatches the goods), party B
Gniemnediary party) and party C (party buying goods from B).
The transaction must involve parties VAT registered in different EU member states;
+ The goods must be transported directly from A to C either by A or by B (in which case B must not make
use of its VAT number of country A if they have one there too);
+B must not have an establishment in the country where transport ends;
+B purchases goods for the purposes of reselling them to C; and
+ C must use the VAT ID of the country where transport ends.

Although it is rare, triangulation simplification also applies to chain transactions with four or more parties,
provided that the supply with intra-Community transport is the one before the last supply, i.e. in case of
ABCD, the B-C supply must be the supply with transport.

276 | Hungary

--- Page 93 ---
3.5 Acquisition threshold

‘The threshold for the acquisition of goods by non-taxable legal persons, taxable persons engaged in exempt
activities and flat-rate farmers from suppliers established in another EU Member State is EUR 10,000.

3.6 Effective use and enjoyment
Hungary has implemented the following effective use and enjoyment rule,
The place of supply of short- and long-term B2B and B2C rental of means of transport (including railway

coaches) by a non-EU service provider to a person in Hungary, or by a Hungarian service provider to a non-
EU person, is where the effective use and enjoyment takes place.

4. Chargeable event and chargeability

41 Principles

In the case of a supply of goods or services, the VAT becomes, in principle, chargeable at the time the goods
or services are supplied.

4.2 Partia{ fulfillment and advance payments

If the supply of goods or services is divisible and the supply is delivered partially, the date of the partial
fulfillment becomes the date of supply.

VAT can be chargeable before the time the goods are put at the disposal of the acquirer or the service is
completed, provided that the payer has the legal obligation to pay the money before the delivery and pays an
amount which is or will become part of the consideration. This is the case when the price has been totally or
partially received, before the goods are put at the disposal of the acquirer or the services are supplied. To the
extent that any such payment is received in advance, an ‘actual’ tax point arises.

43 Continuous supplies

If the parties agreed in a periodical settlement or payment or the consideration of the transaction is assessed
for a certain period (together ‘periodic supply of goods and services’), the VAT shall be assessed (paid and
declared) based on the specific rules of periodical settlement. Examples of periodic supplies include situations
where the fee is determined over the period of time, e.g. monthly, quarterly, annual subscription or other fees,
rents, etc. and situations where the settlement is done with respect of supplies made in a specific period, for
example, “all bread rolls baked by the bakery for the supermarket in March”.

In this case, the tax point date shall be determined based on the following special rules:

+ the iast day of the period, if none of the special rules described in the next points applies;

+ the invoice date, if the invoice date as well as the due date is before the last day of the invoicing period;

+ the due date, if the due date is later than the last day of the invoicing period, if the due date is not later
than the 60%day following the last day of the invoicing period; or

+ the 60 day following the last day of the period, if the due date is later than the 60" day following the last
day of the invoicing period.

4.4 Cash accounting

A taxable person may opt for the cash accounting scheme provided that the below conditions are fully met
This means that VAT becomes payable by the supplier only when the respective payment was effected by the
customer. This also means that the recipient of the goods/services may only deduct the VAT charged in the
invoice if the financial settlement has been completed.

Small-sized businesses according to the terms of the respective act, may only opt for the cash accounting if
they fulfil the following conditions:

Hungary | 277

--- Page 94 ---
+ the place of establishment is in Hungary (for lack of such, the domicile or habitation);

* do not fall under liquidation or voluntary dissolution procedures;

* did not opt for the tax exemption; and

* the net value of sales revenue on the supply of services and goods did not exceed HUF 125 million in the
previous year nor is likely to exceed this threshold in the given year. When calculating this threshold, not
only domestic but all transactions must be considered.

5) Taxable amount

SA Bad debt relief

Bad debt relief is available in Hungary for VAT purposes under certain strict conditions.

The taxable amount may be reduced subsequently by the amount of consideration in whole or in part,

exclusive of VAT, shown under bad debts, under the following cumulative conditions:

+ the taxable person and the person to whom the goods or services are supplied are acting as independent
parties;

+ the taxable person notifies the (axable person to whom the goods and/or services are supplied in writing
in advance, except if the person to whom the goods and/or services are supplied dissolved without
succession;

+ the taxable person is not adjudicated in bankruptcy, liquidation or involuntary de-registration proceedings
at the time the tax return affected by the bad debt is submitted;

+ at least one year has lapsed since the due date of the payment of consideration for the supply of good and/
or services underlying the accounts claimed as bad debts, except where the term of limitation for civil
claims relating to supplies of goods and/or services underlying the accounts claimed as bad debts is less
than one year; and

+ the consideration payable for the supply of good or services underlying the accounts claimed as bad debts
was not and cannot be recovered otherwise.

The advance written notice to be sent to the supplier shall include at least the following information:

+ the reason for accounting the consideration charged as bad debt;

+ the serial number of the invoice where the consideration is unpaid;

* amount of the bad debt (showing separately the amount of consideration or part of the consideration and
the amount of VAT charged); and

* a statement that the taxable person will subsequently deduct the amount of consideration referred to in
Paragraph c), exclusive of VAT, from the taxable amount.

Enclosed with the tax return, the taxable person shall disclose the reason for accounting the amount as bad
debt to the tax authority using the form prescribed for that purpose. The form must include the number

of the invoice for the supply of goods or services on which the taxable amount is reduced, the amount of
deduction, the name and tax number of the taxable person to whom the goods or services are supplied, and
an explanation why the consideration payable for the supply of the goods or services claimed as bad debt was
not and cannot be recovered otherwise.

If the supplier of goods or services recovers the consideration accounted as bad debt in whole or in part after
it was deducted from the taxable amount, the taxable amount may not be reduced subsequently by up to the
amount of consideration or part consideration recovered, exclusive of VAT. Enclosed with the tax return the
taxable person shall disclose the amount of the consideration or part of the consideration recovered to the tax
authority using the form prescribed for that purpose, exclusive of VAT, including the name and tax number of
the taxable person to whom the goods or services were supplied.

Where the consideration for the supply of goods and/or services is written off as bad debt, and the person

to whom the goods and/or services are supplied is not a taxable person, unless otherwise provided for, VAT
amount reduction shall be applicable where the taxable amount is reduced

278 | Hungary

--- Page 95 ---
5.2 Cash discounts

Assume that the supplier sends the following invoice:

“Supply of goods EUR 1,000
27% VAT EUR 270
Total to be paid EUR 1,270

If payment is received by us within the next 14 days, you can subtract 2% of the invoice as a cash discount”

Payment is indeed received within 14 days. In that case the supplier must pay EUR 264,60 in its VAT return.
The customer can deduct EUR 264,60 in its VAT return. Therefore, the supplier has to issue a ‘modified
invoice’

5.3 Open Market Value

In lieu of the consideration, the open market value shall be applied as the taxable amount if the supply of

goods or services takes place between non-independent parties:

+ where the consideration charged is unreasonably higher than the open market value of the goods or
services in question and the supplier does not have a full right of deduction;

+ where the consideration charged is unreasonably lower than the open market value of the goods or
services in question and the recipient of the supply does not have a full right of deduction; or

+ where the consideration charged is unreasonably lower than the open market value of the goods or
services in question when the supplier does not have a full right of deduction and the supply is subject to
an exemption.

‘This rule shall not apply where the consideration is determined by a binding statutory provision, or if the
consideration is to be determined on the basis of the relevant legal regulations.

54 Returnable packaging

As regards the costs of returnable packing material, Hungary includes them in the taxable amount and take
the measures necessary to ensure that this amount is adjusted if the packing material is in fact retuned (VAT
base reduced).

Special rules apply to certain packing materials such as plastic bottles, where there is a prefixed packaging
fee

6. VAT rates

61 Standard rate

The standard rate in Hungary is 2

6.2 Reduced rate
The reduced rates in Hungary are 5% and 18%,

‘The 5% rate applies for instance to:

+ supplies of new residential property, subject to farther conditions:

+ certain human medicines and other medical products;

+ certain breeding: live pig, bovine, sheep, goat;

+ consumer products: whole or half pig, bovine, sheep, goat, pork - fresh, chilled o frozen;
+ certain products for blind persons;

+ books, magazines, newspapers;

+ distance supply of heat;

+ milk and certain dairy products;

Hungary | 279

--- Page 96 ---
* hotel and accommodation services; and
«live music in certain circumstances.

The 18% rate applies for instance on:
+ certain milk and dairy products; and
+ products prepared from grain, flour or starch

Hungary has introduced a local 0% VAT rate on daily newspapers and magazines (daily meaning at least four
times a week).

Tt Exemptions

WW Exemptions with the right to deduct VAT

Hungary applies an exemption with the recovery of input VAT for the following supplies and services:

* — exports and intra~Community supplies of goods;

+ goods supplied to travelers resident outside the EU under retail export schemes or through tax-free shops;

+ services in the framework of inward processing on behalf of principals resident outside the EU;

* _ services of intermediaries relating to transactions carried out outside the EU;

* sea vessels and aircraft and related goods and services;

+ supplies made to customers with (diplomatic) tax immunity;

* supplies of monetary gold to central banks;

+ transport of goods to and from Madeira and the Azores as well as the transport of goods between those
islands;

* goods under customs control or VAT warehousing arrangements;

+ international passenger transport by seagoing vessel or airplane;

* provisioning with foodstuffs of seagoing vessels, with the exception of vessels for inshore fishing;

* — services to goods under customs control; and

+ services provided in a VAT warehouse.

TAL Intra~Community supplies

‘To qualify as VAT exempt, intra-Community supplies must be accompanied by proof thal the goods have

left Hungary. For the exemption to apply, a transport document or other credible proof (e.g. warehouse

documents, customer declarations) or documents described in the EU VAT Implementing Regulation must be

available. Suppliers must retain: 2 documents from list A; or 1 from list A plus | from list B:

+ List A: Signed CMR road transport document; Bill of Lading; Airfreight invoice; courier invoice.

+ List B: Insurance policy for the transport of the goods; official documentary proof or arrival of the goods;
or receipt by operator of receiving warehouse in country of arrival

If the customer picks up the goods, the supplier may apply the exemption if he is in possession of the

following:

* a written statement from the customer, stating that the goods have been dispatched or transported by the
cusomer, or by a third party on behalf of the customer, and identifying the Member State of destination of
the goods; that written statement shall state: the date of issue; the name and address of the acquirer; the
quantity and nature of the goods; the date and place of the arrival of the goods; in the case of the supply
of means of transport, the identification number of the means of transport; and the identification of the
individual accepting the goods on behalf of the acquirer; and

+ at least two items of non-contradictory evidence referred to above

‘The customer shall furnish the vendor with the written statement referred above by the tenth day of the month
following the supply.

7.1.2 Export supplies

To qualify as VAT exempt, exports supplies must be accompanied by proof that the goods have left Hungary
(within 90 days).

280 | Hungary

--- Page 97 ---
For export supplies, in order to apply the tax exemption, a certificate from the authority that exited the
territory of the Community is required, which authentically certifies the fact of the exit of the product from
the territory of the Community (“Confirmation of Exit”).

If the goods do not leave the customs border within 90 days but all other conditions of an export are fulfilled,
the exporter can reduce the VAT paid on the sale, if the product leaves the customs territory within 360 days.

7.1.3 Warehousing

7.1.3.1 VAT warehouse

Hungary has introduced the VAT warehouse. Goods from non-EU countries (i.e. customs goods) and excise
goods cannot enter the VAT warehouse. The sale of goods is VAT exempt if the goods are transported to a
VAT warehouse or are Jocated in a VAT warehouse. The intra-Community acquisition of goods in a VAT
warehouse is also exempt.

A guarantee or a deposit must be provided for the operation of a VAT warehouse. Export of goods from the
warehouse must be proven by customs documents. The supply of goods to other EU Member States must
be proven by transport documents. If there is lack of sufficient proof, the tax office will withdraw the VAT
amount from the guarantee or deposit

The supplier does not have to be registered in Hungary for the purpose of a supply of the goods stored in a
VAT warehouse to an EU Member State. The condition is that the supplier enters into an agreement with the
warehouse keeper whereby the EU VAT identification number of the latter is used for the intra~-Community
supply.

7.1.3.2 Bonded (customs) warehouse

Goods which have not been cleared for free circulation can be stored in bonded (customs) warehouses. Sales
with respect to goods located within a bonded warehouse are exempt. Also, services performed on the goods
are exempt from VAT. Import VAT is payable upon taking the goods out of the bonded warehouse, the owner
of those goods is liable for the VAT.

72 Exemptions without right to deduction

7.2.1 Exemptions in the public interest

Postal services, certain hospital services, medical and paramedical care, cultural activities, ambulance
services, services rendered by undertakers, educational services, services of a cultural or social nature, some
radio and audio-visual services, services of non-profit organizations, some services connected with sports, etc.
are exempt of VAT.

Most of these exemptions, however, are granted on detailed conditions relating to the legal status or license of
the supplier, the purpose of the activity of the supplier, and many other conditions.

7.2.2 Other exemptions

Other exemptions are financial and banking services, insurance services, management of collective
investment funds, certain games of chance, postal and telecommunication services, non-commercial activities
of public radio and television broadcasting organizations, letting of immovable property, the supply of
immovable property, services by employers or employees’ organizations, or by political, religious, charitable
organizations, etc.

Some of these exemptions are granted on certain conditions.

7.3 Option for taxation

Regarding the supply and letting of certain immovable property (defined by the VAT law) , the supplier may
opt for taxation for VAT purposes. This requires notification to the tax authorities. Opting for VAT taxation
may, depending on the taxpayer’s decision, pertain to all types of immovable properties that are being let

or only toa restricted scope of such properties: immovable properties other than residential buildings. If

Hungary | 281

--- Page 98 ---
a taxable person chooses either of these options, it remains binding until the end of the S® calendar year
following the year when the choice is made.

The supplier may limit the option of taxation regarding the sale of all of his immovable properties or all
lettings of them. The option is not available regarding single transactions. However, it is possible to decide
differently regarding residential properties and other properties.

Itis not possible to opt for financial services.
8. Liability

8.1 Reverse charge

In Hungary there is the reverse charge for general B2B services provided by non-established taxable to
Hungarian VAT registered taxable persons in Hungary. This reverse charge applies in all EU Member States
and follows from Articles 44 and 196 EU VAT Directive.

For the reverse charge to apply

+ the supplier should not be established in Hungary (they could be VAT registered),

+ the recipient must be VAT registered in Hungary (it is sufficient to be registered, no need to be
established).

If neither the supplier nor the recipient is VAT registered, the reverse charge is not applicable, and the supplier
should register for VAT.

8.1.1 General reverse charge - non-resident suppliers (Article 194 EU VAT Directive)

Domestic reverse charge applies in the case of a supply of goods with installation or assembly and services
of which the place of supply is Hungary by a non-established supplier. Hungary did not introduce a reverse
charge for the supply of goods other than the supply of goods with installation or assembly and the supplies
mentioned in chapter 8.3.

For the reverse charge to apply

+ the supplier should not be established in Hungary (they could be VAT registered); and

+ the recipient must be VAT registered in Hungary (it is sufficient to be registered, no need to be
established).

If neither the supplier nor the recipient is VAT registered, the reverse charge is not applicable, and the supplier
should register for VAT.

The following supplies of goods fall under the reverse charge mechanism in Hungary if the place of the
supply is deemed to be in Hungary and the supplier is not established in the Hungary, but the recipient is
registered for VAT purposes in Hungary:
supply ofa newly built immovable property subject to registration in the land registry;
+ supply of goods with installation or assembly:
* supply of gas through a natural gas system situated within the territory of the Community or any network
connected to such a system, the supply of heat or cooling energy through heating or cooling networks,
and the supply of electricity.

In case of the supply of goods with installation or assembly, the reverse charge is applicable if the supplier
is not established in Hungary but the customer is registered for VAT purposes in Hungary. On the invoice,
reference must be made to the application of the reverse charge. The supplier must use the following text on
the invoice: “forditott adézés” (translation: reverse charge).

282 | Hungary

--- Page 99 ---
The following services fall under the reverse charge rule in Hungary if the place of the supply is deemed to be
in Hungary and the supplier is not established in Hungary, but the recipient is registered for VAT purposes in
Hungary:

* services relating to immovable property;

+ transport of passengers;

+ admission to cultural, artistic, scientific and similar events;

* — short-term hiring of vehicles; and

* — services of restaurants.

‘The supplier must use the following text on the invoice: “forditott adéz4s” (translation: reverse charge).

8.1.2 Reverse charge mechanism - specific domestic rules (Article 199 EU VAT Directive)

On the following supplies and/or services reverse charge rules apply if both the supplier and the customer are

VAT registered in Hungary:

+ supply of a building;

+ certain supply of construction services, including repair, cleaning, maintenance, alteration and demolition
services in relation to immovable property;

+ supply of staff engaged in certain construction related supplies;

+ supply of immovable property with an option for taxation;

+ supply of old used materials, scrap, waste;

+ supply of goods provided as security by one taxable person to another in execution of that security;

+ supply of an asset with a market value exceeding HUF 100,000 (approximately EUR 250) under an
insolvency or similar procedure;

+ sale of greenhouse gases (CO2 Emission Rights);

+ sale of certain agricultural products by a taxable person not falling under the special rules of the flat-rate
scheme for farmers; and

+ certain iron and steel products which are listed in Annex 6/A of the VAT Law.

The supplier must use the following text on the invoice: “forditott adézés” (translation: reverse charge).

8.2 di nt and several liability

Joint and several liability applies in the following cases:
+ VAT warehouse operator for the inventory loss and for unresolved tax obligations; and
+ onward supply of goods or services (including recharges) between VAT registered affiliated parties.

9. Recovery of input VAT

91 Non-recoverable input VAT

The input VAT is not recoverable on:

* passenger cars, petrol, other fuel for passenger cars, products for passenger cars;

* — services necessary to operate passenger cars (up to 50%);

* motorcycles exceeding 125 cc, yachts and similar sports or entertainment vehicles;
* restaurants and catering- food and drinks, entertainment;

+ construction/building or purchase of housing real estate;

+ taxi, parking, tolls;

+ telecommunication services (up to 30%); and

+ services related to the maintenance and the operation of passenger cars (50%).

VAT is generally recoverable on the above-listed products and services if they are purchased for the purpose
of reselling or recharging.

Hungary | 283

--- Page 100 ---
9.2 Excess input VAT

Excess input VAT is generally recoverable and refunded by the VAT authorities. Llowever, if the refund
does not exceed certain amounts, the refund is carried forward. This amount differs depending on the actual
frequency of VAT reporting:

+ HUF | million (approximately EUR 2,500); for monthly VAT filers;

+ HUF 250,000 (approximately EUR 640); for quarterly VAT filers; and

+ HUF 50,000 (approximately EUR 130); for yearly VAT filers.

Excess input VAT is refunded by the tax office within 20 to 75 days depending on the status of the taxpayer
(reliable, risky or general), the amount of the refundable VAT and whether the purchase invoice has been settled.

9.3 Capital goods - adjustment periods

+ immovable property - 20 years following the month of first use, and
+ movable property - 5 years following the month of first use.

9.4 VAT refund for foreigners

9.4.1 VAT refund to EU taxable persons

The refund application must be submitted electronically through the portal of the tax authority of the country
in which the claimant is established. The claim can be submitted in Hungarian, English, French or German.

Annual minimum limit (for claims that are made for a calendar year or the remainder of a calendar year) is
EUR 50. Interim minimum limit (for claims that are made for less than a calendar year but at least 3 months)
is EUR 400,

Minimum period for making a claim is 3 consecutive calendar months in one calendar year, unless it is the
remainder of the year. Maximum period for making a claim is 1 calendar year. Deadline for making the claim
is 30 September of the year following the year over which the claim is made. No application is accepted after
the deadline.

Supporting documents (e.g. copies of invoices) are required in the following cases:
+ the taxable base regarding fuel exceeds the equivalent of EUR 250; and
+ the taxable base regarding other supplies exceeds the equivalent of EUR 1,000.

The tax authorities must issue a decision on the refund claim within 4 months of receipt of the claim. The
period in which the authorities must make a decision will be extended to 6 months or maximally to 8 months
if the authorities request additional information. The tax authorities usually ask for a proof of payment from
the bank that the supplies were paid by the claimant, the contracts or agreements/orders and a description of
what the business purpose of the purchase was.

Ifa refund is granted, it will be processed within 10 business days and paid to the bank account number
provided to the tax authorities. Time limit for appeals is 15 days following the decision. If this appeal is
unsuccessful, the claimant can initiate proceedings before the national court (within 30 days after a receipt of
the decision on appeal).

The input VAT is not recoverable in case of:

+ supplies of goods and services that are not used for business purposes;

+ supplies and services acquired or imported in connection with an exempt business activity;

+ supplies of goods and services where the VAT law regulates the non-recoverable VAT (see paragraph 9.1);
+ VAT charged erroneously or incorrectly; and

9.4.2 VAT refund to non-EU taxable persons

VAT is refunded to non-EU taxable persons if the reciprocity condition is fulfilled in this matter. Switzertand,
Liechtenstein, Norway, Serbia, Turkey (with some limitations) and the UK fulfill the criteria of such
reciprocity with Hungary,

284 | Hungary

--- Page 101 ---
The application can be filed electronically or with a form. The application form can be downloaded at:
hups:/iinyurl.comlyhkanef2z

Annual minimum limit (for claims that are made for a calendar year or the remainder of a calendar year) is
EUR 50. Interim minimum limit (for claims that are made for less than a calendar year but at least 3 months)
is EUR 400.

Minimum period for making a claim is 3 consecutive calendar months in one calendar year, unless it is the
remainder of the year. Maximum period for making a claim is 1 calendar year.

‘The claim must be submitted on time to be received by the tax authority by 30 June of the year following the
year over which the claim is made. No application is accepted if it is received after the deadline.
The claim must be sent to the following address:

Postbox:

NAY Kiemelt Adb & Igazgats ga

Kiilfeldiek Ad6-visszatéritését Intéz6 Féosztily H-1410 Budapest
PF. 138

Hungary

Address’

NAV Kiemelt Adé 6 Igazgaté ga

Kiilfoldiek Ad6-visszatéritését Intézé Féosztély H-1077 Budapest
Dob utca 75-81

Hungary

The following documents must be sent together with a claim:

+ declaration of entrepreneurship from the tax administration in the country where the foreign taxable
person is established;

* original invoices and import documents; and

+ aproof of payment from the bank that the invoiced amount has been paid.

The tax authorities must issue a decision regarding the refund claim within 6 months of receipt of the

claim (application and all supporting documents). If the tax authorities request additional information, the
6-month period will be suspended until the claimant has complied with its obligation to provide the necessary
information.

If a refund is granted, it will be made in the currency indicated by the claimant directly to the claimant or its
appointed agent before the end of the above period and paid to the bank account indicated by the claimant,

‘The time limit for appeal is 15 days following the decision. If this appeal is unsuccessful, the claimant can
initiate proceedings before the national court (within 30 days after receipt of the decision on appeal).

The input VAT is not recoverable in case of:

+ supplies of goods and services that are not used for business purposes;

+ supplies and services acquired or imported in connection with an exempt business activity;

+ supplies of goods and services where the VAT taw regulates the non-recoverable VAT (see paragraph
14.1);

+ VAT charged erroneously or incorrectly; and

+ VAT relating to the purchase of immovable property.

Hungary | 285

--- Page 102 ---
10.

Administrative obligations

10.1 Invoicing

10.1.1 Invoice content

Invoices shall contain the following information:

the date of issue;

a sequential number, which uniquely identifies the invoice;

the tax number under which the taxable person supplied the goods or services;

the customer’s following information:

* tax number, under which the customer received a supply of goods or services in respect of which he is
liable for payment of value added tax, or

+ tax number, under which the customer received a supply of goods as referred to in Section 89, or

* the first eight digits of the tax number - or group identification number in connection with a group
taxation arrangement - under which the taxable person registered in the domestic territory received
a supply of goods or services, provided that the supplier of the goods and/or services has established
his business in the domestic territory, or in the absence of such a place of business, has his permanent
address or usually resides in the domestic territory;

the full name and address of the taxable person and of the customer;

description of the goods supplied, and - at the discretion of the taxable person required to issue the invoice

- the relevant tariff heading used in this Act, furthermore, the quantity of the goods or the description

of the services rendered, and ~ at the discretion of the taxable person required to issue the invoice - the

relevant TESZOR’15 code, used in this Act, furthermore, the extent and nature of the services rendered, if

it can be expressed in some unit of measurement;

the date referred to in Paragraphs a) and b) of Subsection (1) of Section 163, if other than the date of issue

of the invoice;

the words “pénzforgalmi elsz4molis” (“cash accounting”) when using the special taxation scheme defined

under Chapter XIII/A:

the taxable amount, the unit price of goods exclusive of VAT or the unit price of services exclusive of

VAT, if it can be expressed in some unit of measurement, and any discounts or rebates if they are not

included in the unit price;

the VAT rate applied;

the VAT amount payable, except where, in accordance with this Act, such a detail is excluded;

the words “énsz4mlazas” (“self-billing”) where the customer receiving a supply of goods or services

issues the invoice;

in the case of an exemption, reference to the applicable provision of law or to the VAT Directive, or any

other reference indicating that the supply of goods or services is exempt;

the words “forditott adézis” (“reverse charge procedure”) where the customer is liable for payment of

VAT;

in the case of the supply of a new means of transport made in accordance with the conditions specificd

in Section 89, the characteristics as identified in Point 25 of Section 259 pertaining to the new means of

transport;

in connection with the activities of tour operators governed under the special provisions of Chapter XV,

the words “kiilénbézet szerinti szabalyozas - utazdsi irodak” (“margin scheme - travel agents”);

where one of the special arrangements applicable to second-hand goods, works of art, collectors”

items and antiques is applied under the special provisions of Chapter XVI, the words “kiilénbézet

szerinti szabalyozas - hasznalt cikkek” (“margin scheme - second-hand goods”); “kiilénbézet szerinti

szabalyozas - miéalkotésok” (“margin scheme - works of art’) or “killénbézet szerinti szabalyozas -~

gylljteménydarabok és régiségek” (“margin scheme - collector’s items and antiques”) respectively; and

where a financial representative is involved, the name, address and tax number of the financial

representative.

Hungary has introduced the real-time reporting obligation as of | July 2018. The invoices must be issued
by qualified invoicing software that is capable of communicating with the HTA by electronic means in
a pre-defined way. This means that businesses are required to register their invoicing software and the

286 | Hungary

--- Page 103 ---
communication termination point and all data communication between the company and the HTA is done via
this electronic communication protocol. The taxable persons issuing such invoices will be obliged to report
them immediately (within 5 minutes from the moment the invoice is generated in the invoicing software),
without human intervention electronically to the HTA in a predefined way in xml format.

Affected transactions: all supplies of goods and services, either B2B or B2C, including advance payments
related to these supplies, except distant sales reportable in OSS subject to VAT in another EU member
state. This includes supplies of goods or services subject to reverse charge, exempt supplies such as intra-
Community or exports.

Affected suppliers: VAT registered businesses (this includes non-established VAT registered foreign
businesses as well as taxable persons subject to the exemption for SMEs).

Failure to comply with this obligation may result in a significant penalty of up to HUF 500,000
(approximately EUR 1,300) per each undeclared invoice.

10.1.2. Time limits

An invoice must be issued not later than on the 8" day after the day on which the goods were supplied or
services were rendered.

10.1.3 Currency

The invoice can be issued in any currency. However, the VAT amount in Hungarian Forint (HUF) must be
shown on the invoice.

10.1.4 Conversion and exchange rate

The VAT base and VAT amount should be converted to Hungarian Forint on the day when the VAT becomes
due or on the day of the supply. The conversion can be made according to the daily exchange rate of one of
the banks established in Hungary, or, if the taxable person opts for it, the Hungarian National Bank (HNB)
or the European Central Bank (ECB). The taxable person must report to the tax authority if it opted for using
the exchange rates of the HNB or the ECB. The same exchange rate source must be used for calculating the
taxable base of all transactions. The taxable person may not change its decision before the end of the second
calendar year following the year of the change.

10.1.5 Self-billing

Under Hungarian VAT legislation, self-billing is allowed if there is an agreement between the two parties (for
instance a contract or a written agreement).

10.1.6 Simplified invoice

A simplified invoice must contain the same information as a normal invoice with the exception of the
following:

consideration should include the total amount payable without breaking it down to net amount and VAT
amount, for example “the total amount payable HUF 100”

VAT rate embedded in the total payable amount, i.e. calculated from the top, in case of the 27 % rate, is 21,26
%, but the VAT amount may be omitted on the simplified invoice.

Simplified invoicing is applicable only in certain cases listed in the VAT Act. The gross amount should not
exceed EUR 100,

The taxable person can opt to issue receipts instead of invoices if its customer pays the consideration,
inclusive of VAT, by the time of supply at latest in full, without requesting an invoice from the taxable person.

Receipts must contain the following details:

+ the date of issue;

+ a sequential number, which uniquely identifies the receipt;

+ name, address and VAT number of the taxable person issuing the receipt; and
+ the total sum payable for the supply of goods or services, inclusive of VAT.

Hungary | 287

--- Page 104 ---
10.1.7 Storage of invoices

Invoices need to be kept available for the period until the right to claim the VAT elapses. It is usually +1
years, ITowever, in the case of self-corrections the deadline starts from the day of the correction

‘The invoices must be kept in original or as certified copies. Electronic invoices must be kept electronically.
Paper invoices may also be kept electronically.

The place of storage of the invoices is not restricted, but it must be reported to the tax office if the place of
storage is not the seat of the company. The documents must be made available within 3 days if requested by
the tax authorities.

10.1.8 Electronic invoicing

The authenticity, the integrity of data content and the readability of the electronic invoices must be ensured.
All business procedures that provide a reliable audit trail between the invoice and the supply are sufficient
for this purpose. Advanced electronic signature and electronic data interchange (EDI) are mentioned in the
law as examples. The recipient of the invoice must consent to the electronic invoicing. The supplier and the
recipient of the invoice issued with EDI must conclude an agreement about the method of applying and using
the EDI. It is not required for the electronic invoice to be structured, i.e. pdf invoice is acceptable if it fulfills
the requirements mentioned above. Electronic invoices must be issued from the software capable of real time
reporting to the HTA.

10.2 VAT compliance

10.2.1. VAT return period

The standard VAT return is to be filed every quarter. The VAT return must be submitted monthly if the

net payable VAT exceeded HUE | million (approximately EUR 2,500) in the second year preceding the

year in question. Also, if during the current year, the net payable VAT in a quarter exceeds HUF I million
(approximately EUR 2,500), the taxpayer must change to monthly filing, A yearly VAT return must be filed

if the net payable VAT did not exceed HUF 250,000 (approximately EUR 640) in the second year before the
year in question, except if the taxpayer has an EU VAT identification number. The yearly filing taxable person
must change to more frequent filing periods whenever it exceeds any of the above-mentioned thresholds
during the year.

Monthly VAT returns must be submitted in the year of VAT registration and in the subsequent year.

In principle, a domestic business is required to submit electronic VAT returns. A foreign company which is
registered only for VAT purposes can submit paper VAT returns if it does not have an EU VAT identification
number,

10.2.2 Filing of VAT return and payment
The VAT due must be received on the bank account of the VAT authorities on or before the 20" day of the

month following the VAT return period (i.e. the VAT due over January 2025 must have been received by the
VAT authorities on 20 February 2025). The same deadline applies to the VAT return.

The Hungarian VAT return (form XX65 where the first two digits represent the last two digits of the current
year) is very complicated and changes every year.

VAT returns can be submitted in the following ways:

+ “Classic” VAT return submission electronically by applying ANYK reporting software to compile and
submit the 65 VAT return form and A60 IC Sales and Purchase Listing;

+ e-VAT system, web based —on the HU Tax Authority’s e-VAT system user interface, One can approve or
modify the draft of the VAT return prepared by the HU Tax Authority; and

+ e-VAT system, the so called Machine to Machine (M2M) interface.

‘The VAT return can be downloaded here:
Attps.//tinyurl.com/yhkuvf2z

288 | Hungary

--- Page 105 ---
Access to the ¢-VAT system is here:
https://eafa.nav.gov.hu

Ifthe taxable base or the VAT amount changes after the VAT return has been submitted (for example certain
invoices were not reported or modification invoices were issued) according to the main rule, the respective
VAT return shalll be self-revised. This means that the respective VAT return shalll be re-submitted with the
correct figures. If self-revision results in additional payable VAT, self-revision interest is payable

If the reporting period has been closed by the tax audit, re-opening of such period may be requested from the
HTA, if new facts or circumstances have emerged since the tax audit.

In certain cases self-revision is not necessary. There is no need for self-revision, for example, if the amount
of the deductible input VAT changes (e.g. the taxpayer received a modification invoice from its supplier with
amended input VAT).

10.2.3 European sales listing
Form XXA60 (where the first two digits represent the last two digits of the current year) must be submitted
if the taxable person has performed an intra-Commmnity supply of goods, an intra-Community acquisition of
goods, or if it has supplied or received general B2B services to/from a taxable person established in another
EU Member State (see also paragraph 8.1).

Generally, the form must be submitted with the same frequency as the VAT return. However, even if the
VAT return is submitted quarterly, the form must be filed monthly if the intra-Community supply of products
exceeds EUR 100,000 ina given quarter or in any of the preceding quarters.

Form XXA60 includes separate pages for intra-Community sales, intra~Community acquisitions, incoming
services and supplied services. No threshold exists for the reporting: all transactions must be reported.

The European sales/acquisition/service listing can be downloaded at: https://tinyurl.com/yhkanvf2z

10.2.4 National recapitulative statement

‘The national recapitulative statement (also known as itemized report) was introduced on I January 2013
in Hungary. The form is an addition to the VAT return. Its number is XX65A, followed by “M” pages per
customer or supplier.

From 1 July 2020, the previous threshold of HUF 100,000 was eliminated, thus the data of all approved
incoming supplier invoices for which the company intends to exercise the right to deduct VAT must be
provided to NAV on the M-sheet in the domestic recapitulative statement.

On the M-sheet all incoming invoices issued by domestic taxable persons, if the taxpayer exercises the right
to deduct tax in connection with the invoices. It is very important to emphasize that according to the new
tules, the supplier invoices for which the customer of the invoice is required to pay VAT are also included in
the scope of the M-sheet, as he still exercises the right to deduct tax (reverse charge taxation).

Thus, from 1 July 2020, the NAV online invoice report covers all domestic supplies of goods and

services (except for intra-Community supplies), independently on whether there was output VAT or these
transactions were subject to VAT or exempt from VAT. This will enable NAV to prepare draft VAT returns for
taxable persons. The recapitulative statements extend to all supplier invoices of the company so that NAV can
ensure that the companies do exercise the right to deduct VAT based on the invoice issued by another
domestic taxable person and certified to NAV.

The customer is required to include the invoice in the period when the VAT charged on the invoice is
reclaimed by giving the following information:

* the VAT identification number of the supplier/customer;

+ basis and amount of VAT;

+ invoice number: and

+ date of the supply.

Hungary | 289

--- Page 106 ---
The form can be downloaded together with the VAT return form.

Taxpayers filing their VAT return through the e-VAT system are not required to file the domestic recapitulative
statements.
10.2.5 Tax assessment period

‘The tax assessment period in Hungary is 5 calendar years after the year of filing the VAT return, For example,
Q4 2024 is to be filed in January 2025. This means that the assessment period is 31 December 2025 + 5 years=
31 December 2030.

10.3 Penalties

10.3.1 Default penalties for late registration
There is no penalty for a late registration, however late payment interest may be charged on the delayed VAT
payment,

10.3.2 Default penalties for not filing a VAT return or a European sales listing on time

If the VAT return or the European sales listing is not filed on time, the maximum penalty is HUF 500,000
(approximately EUR 1,300). Usually, it is HUF 100,000 (approximately EUR 260) for the first offence.

10.3.3 Default penalties for not paying VAT on time to the VAT authorities

If the VAT is not paid on time, the VAT authorities calculate an interest penalty from the day it should have
been paid until the day it is paid. The interest rate is twice the “prime rate” which is established by the
National Bank of Hungary. The late payment penalty can be calculated here: htips://iinyurl.com/8fmkm3jw
10.3.4 Default penalties on VAT assessments when VAT is not reported correctly

Ifthe VAT is not reported and not paid correctly, or reclaimed incorrectly, the tax authority is entitled to levy a
penalty up to 50% of the underpaid tax. Penally interest (see paragraph 10.3.3) up to 3 years is also due in this
case.

If, before a VAT audit is started by the tax authority, the taxable person self-corrects its VAT liability and pays
the tax and the self-correction interest (if applicable), the tax authority is not entitled to levy tax penalties or
interest fines,

When a self-correction is made by the taxable person, no penalty but a self-correction interest is payable,
which is equal to the “prime rate” established by the National Bank of Hungary.

When an error is detected by the taxable person in any of its earlier VAT returns (back to 5 years), the
correction must be made by the re-filing of that particular VAT return. The interest penalty is payable from the
due date of that VAT return until the actual payment of the difference.

10.3.5 Offence penalties
The penalty can be 200% of the unpaid tax if it is due to gross negligence. If the act was intentional, the case

can incur criminal penalties as well.
10.4 Intrastat

In Hungary, separate Intrastat returns must be submitted to the Central Bureau of Statistics, Kézponti
Statisztikai Hivatal (KSH).

10.4.1 Intrastat threshold
From 2025 the data reporting thresholds are as follows:

+ 400 million HUF for arrivals; and
+ 160 million HUF for dispatches.

290 | Hungary

--- Page 107 ---
A special regulation applies to businesses reporting movement of goods for certain toll manufacturing
transactions. If the business is obliged to report data in one direction, it must also report its turnover in the
other direction — regardless of the threshold.

Businesses whose total value of their inbound reported in Intrastat or ~ in the absence of an Intrastat report
of intra-Community purchases or sales in their VAT retums for a maximum of 12 months exceeds the
applicable special threshold, are also required to complete the “statistical value” section of the questionnaire.

The special thresholds for 2025 are:

* 6 billion HUF for arrivals; and
* 15 billion HUF for dispatches.

Starting from 2025, the following companies are exempted from Intrastat arrival reporting obligation:

* ifthe intra~Community arrivals do not exceed 3.5 billion HUF; and

+ achieved excellent data quality (certification from the Statistical Office) based on the comparison of the
Intrastat arrival report they provided in the previous year and the data received from other Member States
within the framework of the MDE (microdata exchange)

10.4.2 Intrastat data to be reported

Intrastat data should be reported in the KSH-Elektra system via web filing, or xml / csv data format share.
Detailed information on the format, the reportable data and its format is available at the website of the
Statistical Office

Attps://tinyurl.com/bdnwwr3v

10.5 Additional compliance requirements

‘There are no additional requirements.

Information received from:
Daniel Sztanko

daniel.sztanko@hungarianvat.hu
www.hungarianvat.hu

Hungary | 291

--- Page 109 ---
Treland

The European Union (EU) VAT Directive is implemented through the VAT Consolidation Act 2010 and
related VAT Regulations. VAT is referred to in Ireland as “Value Added Tax” or “VAT”.

1; ‘Taxable persons

dd Registration threshold & SME Scheme for domestic taxable persons

A taxable person is required to register for Irish VAT purposes where its annual turnover exceeds, or is likely
to exceed, the following thresholds:

+ BUR 42,500 for supplies of services;

+ BUR 42,500 in any continuous 12-month period for persons supplying goods liable at the reduced or
standard rates which they have manufactured or produced from zero rated materials;

+ EUR 85,000 for supplies of goods;

+ EUR 85,000 for persons supplying both goods and services where 90% or more of the turnover is derived
from supplies of goods (other than of the kind referred to at (b) above); and

+ EUR 41,000 in any continuous 12-month period for persons making intra-Community acquisitions of
goods into Ireland.

In addition, the following taxable persons are required to register for Irish VAT purposes:

* persons disposing of interests in immovable goods, where the disposal is not exempt from VAT;

+ landowners that allow non-established mobile traders or non-established promoters of events onto
their property for periods of less than 28 days have obligations to report certain information to the Irish
Revenue Commissioners (“Irish Revenue”). Failure to do so can make them accountable persons and
liable for the VAT due by the mobile trader; and

* — persons in receipt of taxable services from suppliers established outside of Ireland;

+ farmers and fisherman who elect to be accountable persons or who haye taxable turnover in excess of the
registration thresholds from other activities.

Taxable persons established for VAT purposes in Ireland are not required to register for Irish VAT if their
level of tumover does not exceed the appropriate threshold. However, they may elect to register for Irish VAT.
Voluntary VAT registration is effected in the same manner as the mandatory VAT registration process.

Please note that in Irish VAT legislation, a taxable person is defined as a person who independently carries
on a business within the EU or elsewhere. An accountable person is a taxable person who engages in the
supply within Ireland of taxable goods or taxable services and is accountable for and liable to pay the tax
charged in respect of such a supply. Legislation deems others to be accountable persons (those engaged in
intra~Community acquisitions, VAT groups, electing to register, etc.). Effectively, an accountable person is
someone who is entitled or required to register for VAT in Ireland.

For information regarding the completion of a registration application and details on what documentation
needs to be provided for VAT registration see also paragraph 1.2.

Irish VAT registration forms can be downloaded at: https.//tinyurl.com/ykzay3vr

Different forms apply to individuals and partnerships and to companies. There are separate forms for non-
established persons and entities see paragraph 1.2.1

Ireland | 293

--- Page 110 ---
1.2 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for foreign taxable persons

Non-established persons supplying taxable goods or services in Ireland are obliged to register and account for
Irish VAT regardless of their level of turnover (i.c. no threshold applies).

The EU VAT changes as regards special schemes for small enterprises have not been implemented into Irish
law. However, Irish Revenue guidance confirms that Irish established traders may make a formal application
to them in Ireland if they wish to avail of the scheme in other EU Member States.

To register for VAT, taxable persons must complete a form TRI for private individuals, partnerships and co-
ownerships or a form TR2 for incorporated entilies. It should be filed with the local Irish Revenue district of
the taxable person. Different forms are used for non-established persons and these are the TR1 (FT) and TR2
(FT). However, please see further details below in relation to e-Registration.

Non-established building contractors and persons making distance sales into Ireland to non-registered
customers and other non-established persons should apply to the following office:

Business Registrations

Office of the Revenue Commissioners
PO Box I

Wexford

Republic of Ireland

Contact details for all Irish Revenue offices are available on the website for Irish Revenue at:
https://tinyurl.com/bddnd2wp

Ifa taxable person is registering in respect of any property-related transaction or construction activity they
will be required to file more detailed documentation in relation to their activities in Ireland. The taxable
person may be required to provide details of planning permission applications/grants in the relevant tax
registration form. The taxable person will also be required to provide additional documents such as a copy
of the minutes from a Board of Directors meeting (for a company) or a signed letter from an individual/
partnership to evidence their intention to make taxable supplies of the property.

Where a taxable person is registering on the basis of being in receipt of reverse charge services from abroad,
an invoice or customer contract is required to accompany the submission of the Form TR2 in order to
evidence such supply. Non-established traders are generally required to provide evidence of a contract with an
Irish customer to demonstrate the requirement to register.

No other documents are required to be filed with the registration application, unless specifically requested
by the Irish Revenue. Examples of such information would be a certificate of VAT registration in another
Member State and an extract from the trade register to include details of directors and shareholders,

Intending traders are entitled to register for VAT purposes prior to making any taxable supplies. Evidence
of intention to make taxable supplies will be required. Irish VAT registration forms can be downloaded at:
Iutps:/Hinyurl.com/S7vhyn2z.

eRegistration is the online facility via ROS which must be used to register for VAT electronically in most
cases. Detailed information on how to register can be found at hitps//tinyurl.com/2zrc6yrp. There are certain
circumstances where the eRegistration process cannot be used, such as where a company director is non-
resident, or a trader is not established in Ireland or a VAT re-registration is required, for example. In such
circumstances, the paper-based system must be used. A full list of the exclusions can be found at the above
link.

Irish Revenue introduced a two-tier VAT registration system in June 2019. Traders applying for an Irish
VAT number must specify whether a domestic only VAT number is required or an intra-EU VAT number.

A domestic only VAT number will generally issue in real-time. Additional information is required (ie,

294 | Ireland

--- Page 111 ---
due diligence measures, transport arrangements for supplies of goods outside of the State and supporting
documentation verifying that such goods have departed the State) when applying for an intra~EU VAT number
and the trader will also be automatically registered for VIES purposes.

13 VAT grouping
VAT grouping is possible in Ireland.

Taxable persons may apply to be VAT grouped where they are closely bound by economic, organisational
and financial links and where it is necessary or appropriate for the effective and efficient administration
and collection of VAT, It is a condition of VAT grouping that all members be established in Ireland for VAT
purposes.

VAT grouping is optional and a taxable person may choose whether to apply for VAT grouping, where the
conditions are fulfilled. However, it should be noted that Irish Revenue are entitled to put a VAT group in
place between entities that satisfy grouping requirements, although in practice this is relatively rare.

VAT grouping is applied for by submitting completed Form VAT 5? for the remitter and Form VAT 53 for
the other group members (non-remitters) to the remitter’s local Irish Revenue district and an application for
granting of a VAT group is ultimately at the discretion of Irish Revenue. The VAT grouping registration is
made in the name of a representative member known as a ‘VAT group remitter’ who is responsible for filing
the single group VAT return and for making and receiving payments to / from Irish Revenue for the VAT
group. A least one member of the VAT group is required to be an accountable person for Irish VAT purposes.

Members of the VAT group will file one single VAT return in the name of and under the VAT number of the
VAT group remitter. However, invoices for taxable supplies of goods or services supplied by each member
of the VAT group to third party customers should be issued in the name of and under the VAT registration
number of the entity making that supply. Supplies among members of an Irish VAT group are disregarded for
VAT purposes and, therefore, VAT invoices do not need fo be issued. The exception to this is the supply of
immovable goods among VAT group members and the supply of non-deductible items, which would include
food, drink, accommodation, employee personal services, petrol, car hire etc.

VAT group members are held jointly and severally liable for the VAT liabilities of the group for the period

during which they are VAT grouped. This liability for the period of VAT grouping remains even after

members have exited the VAT group. Applications for the amendment or disbandment of a VAT group must

be submitted to Irish Revenue by the VAT group remitter in writing within 30 days of the end of the tax year

in which any of the below listed changes occur:

+ amember of the VAT group ceases to be established in Ireland;

+ there is no longer at least one accountable person present in the VAT group; or

+ there has been a significant change to the financial, economic and organisation links between the VAT
group members.

Irish Revenue may cancel a VAT group registration by issuing notice in writing to each member of the VAT
group with effect from the date specified on such notification.

The Irish VAT grouping provisions allow the inclusion of non-taxable persons in a VAT group. This
position was challenged by the European Commission in the ECJ case of C-85/11 (Ireland v the European
Commission). The Irish provisions were confirmed as being in line with the EU VAT Directive

1.4 Fiseal representative

The concept of fiscal representation has not been transposed into Irish law. Therefore, non-established
taxable persons are neither required nor allowed to appoint a fiscal representative in Ireland. However, an EU
established intermediary must be appointed when seeking to avail of the import one stop shop regime (IOSS).

Ireland | 295

--- Page 112 ---
2. Taxable transactions

21 Transfer of business

VAT relieving transfer of business provisions have been implemented in Irish VAT legislation. The relief
applies where there is a transfer of ownership of goods to an accountable person of a totality of assets of a
business, or part thereof, which constitute an undertaking capable of being operated on an independent basis.
The relief applies whether the business is trading or has ceased to trade. The transfer of goodwill or other
intangible assets of a business in connection with the transfer of a business, or part thereof, by an accountable
person to a taxable person that carries on a business in Ireland or by a person that is not an accountable person
to another person also qualifies for relief.

Legislation provides that the parties to a business transfer, that falls within the scope of the relief, are entitled
to reclaim VAT on deductible costs that are directly related to the transfer of the goods, where the transfer
would be VATable in the absence of transfer of business relief. Concessionally, the Irish Revenue will allow
VAT recovery on costs related to the transfer of goodwill or intangibles in accordance with the usual VAT
deduction rules. There are some exceptions to this where property is also transferring as part of the business
and the capital goods implications of such transfer should also be considered from an Irish VAT perspective

2.2 Supplies free of charge

‘A supply free of charge shall be deemed to have been effected for consideration in the course or furtherance
of business for Irish VAT purposes except in the following circumstances:

+ agift of goods made in the course or furtherance of business (otherwise than as one gift forming part of a
series of gifts made to the same person) and the cost to the donor does not exceed EUR 20;

+ the gift in reasonable quantity to the actual or potential customer consists of industrial samples which are
nol ordinarily available for sale to the public;

+ advertising goods such as mirrors, glasses, beer mats bearing the donor’s name supplied to a hotel or pub
ete; or

+ replacement goods supplied in accordance with warranties or guarantees on original goods.

2.3. Importation

2.3.1 Importation followed by an intra-Community supply

‘The zero-rate of VAT may apply where goods are imported from outside the EU into Ireland and at the
time of importation those goods are already consigned to another EU Member State. On arrival in the other
EU Member State, the arrival of the goods must be treated as an intra-Community acquisition, There are a
number of conditions to be fulfilled:

+ Irish Revenue must be satisfied as to the authenticity of any particular case;

+ the importer must be VAT registered in Ireland;

+ the customer must be VAT registered in the other EU Member State;

+ the importer/agent has certain obligations regarding the onward supply; and

+ the goods must be dispatched within one month of clearance.

2 Postponed accounting on importation

Postponed accounting for VAT on imports applies in Ircland with effect from 1 January 2021. Although

this was introduced as a consequence of Brexit, it applies to all imports from third countries. VAT is to be
accounted for in the VAT3 return (in the T] and T2 boxes) of the trader and applies where the trader is VAT
registered in Ireland. A simultaneous input VAT deduction can be taken where so entitled. A new box has
also been added to the VAT3 return -P AJ wv hich will include the net value of the imports (net value plus
carriage, insurance and freight). Traders who do not qualify for postponed accounting or who no longer
qualify will be notified accordingly by Irish Revenue. If a trader does not wish to use postponed accounting,
import VAT will be payable in the normal manner.

296 | Ireland

--- Page 113 ---
‘There is a VAT deferment scheme for the importation of goods which allows accountable persons to defer
payment of import VAT to the 15" day of the month following import. The trader should already be approved
for a comprehensive guarantee. An authorisation number is required before the trader can apply for a deferred
payment authorisation. The application for a customs deferred payment authorisation is made using the
Customs Decisions System (CDS). A Direct Debit for “Customs Duty, Excise and VRT” form should also be
completed.

Furthermore, goods that are imported into the Shannon Free Zone and Ringaskiddy Free Port may be zero
rated at import when certain conditions are satisfied.

By Place of Supply

With effect from | January 2020, new rules were introduced in relation to call-off stock and consignment
stock arrangements,

3.1 Consignment and call-off stock

Irish VAT legislation provides for a simplification measure for call-off stock arrangements.

The relief applies only to EU VAT registered taxable persons. Where the non-established taxable person
makes an intra-Community acquisition of goods in Ireland (i.e. the goods are dispatched from one Member
State to Ireland under a pre-existing agreement between the supplier and the intended purchaser) and
subsequently supplies those goods to an accountable person in Ireland (providing the conditions are met), the
intra-Community acquisition and the following supply by the EU taxable person must be disregarded and the
customer must account for the intra-Community acquisition,

The accountable person in Ireland accounts for VAT on the goods at the time that ownership of the goods
transfers,

The legislative conditions require that:

+ the supplier must not be established in Ireland nor have a fixed establishment in Ireland;

+ the purchaser is VAT registered in Ireland (the identity and VAT number of the purchaser is known to the
supplier at the time of dispatch);

+ the goods are dispatched under a pre-existing agreement between the supplier and the purchaser; and

+ the supplier must keep a record in relation to all transactions covered by the simplification measure.

‘The supplier should hold the stock in an independent warehouse to avoid any risk of being viewed as having
an establishment in Ireland for VAT purposes.

The above simplification measure applies where ownership of the goods only transfers to the purchaser at a
time after arrival of the goods in Ireland but within 12 months of that arrival. The measure is only applicable
to intra~Community acquisitions, not imports.

Simplification measures apply to consignment stock which describes the movernent of stock by a supplier
in one Member State to Ireland to be held as stock in Ireland and is provided to purchasers when stock is
required. The consignment stock must remain under the control of the supplier and must not be intended for
any one known purchaser at the time of transport.

The legislative conditions require that:

+ the EU supplier must not be established in Ireland;

+ the EU supplier has not exercised an option to register for VAT in Ireland;

+ the BU supplier is not otherwise required to be VAT registered in Ireland; and
+ the purchaser is VAT registered in Ireland.

Ireland | 297

--- Page 114 ---
3.2. Installation supplies

Goods that are installed or assembled in Ireland, with or without a trial run, by or on behalf of the supplier

are supplied in Ireland for VAT purposes. There is no formal definition of what constitutes installation or
assembly, although Tax Briefing 58 provides guidance on the Irish Revenue interpretation of “install” and
“assemble” which follows the VAT Committee guidelines. “Install” is normally taken to mean the placing in
position of equipment or machinery. “Assemble” is laken to mean the fitting or gathering together of parts

of equipment or of a machine. Generally, the terms are often referred to by whether the good constitutes
“fixture” or a “fitting”. A fixture is an item that cannot be easily removed without causing damage to the good
or its surroundings and is taxed as a supply of goods. A “fitting” may be easily removed and is generally taxed
asa supply of a service.

A reverse charge provision applies to supplies of goods that are installed in Ireland, with or without a trial run,
by a non-established supplier where the customer is a taxable person who carries on a business in Ireland, or
a public body. In any other case the non-established supplier would be obliged to register for and charge Irish
VAT on the supply, such as where the customer is a private individual,

If the non-established supplicr is supplying services related to fixtures, it would be obliged to register for
Irish VAT and account for VAT on the service supplied. The exception to this rule would be if the services
fall within the scope of a reverse charge that applies for services performed under a “relevant contract”
for Relevant Contracts Tax. If these services fall within the scope of Relevant Contracts Tax, they must be
separately considered because a reverse charge may apply. This is a complex area of tax law.

33 Distance sales threshold

The distance sales threshold is currently EUR 10,000, A non-established taxable person may elect to VAT
register in Ireland at any time prior to its exceeding the threshold. No additional administrative requirements
apply. Once registered, the non-established taxable person is treated in the same way as any other VAT
registered person,

34 Simplified triangulation rules

The simplified triangulation rules have been implemented in Ireland in line with the EU VAT Directive.

Where Lreland is the final State of destination of the goods, the wording of the Irish legislation does not

preclude the application of the triangulation rules if the middleman is VAT registered in Ireland or in the
country of dispatch.

There are no simplification measures applicable to chain supplies. The circumstances of each transaction
should be examtined to ascertain if some of the transactions within a chain supply fall within the triangulation
simplification measures.

3.5 Acquisition threshold

The threshold for the acquisition of goods by non-taxable legal persons, taxable persons engaged in exempt
activities and flat-rate farmers from suppliers established in another EU Member State is EUR 41,000, Where
acquisitions of goods will exceed, or are likely to exceed, this threshold in any continuous 12-month period,
VAT must be accounted for in respect of such acquisitions.

New means of transport and excisable products are excluded from this threshold and are always taxed in the
State of destination (i.e. no threshold applies).

3.6 Effective use and enjoyment

Irish VAT legislation contains a number of use and enjoyment provisions on the basis of Article 59a(b)
Directive:

+ hiring of movable goods that are supplied outside the EU but where the services are used and enjoyed in
Iretand - place of supply is Ireland (applies to supplies made to taxable and non-taxable persons);

298 | Ireland

--- Page 115 ---
+ supply to a non-taxable person of telecommunications, radio, broadcasting services or telephone cards
that are supplied outside the EU but which are used and enjoyed in Ireland - place of supply is Ireland;

+ supply to a non-taxable person of financial services (excluding safe deposit facilities) and insurance
(including reinsurance) which are supplied outside the EU but are used and enjoyed in Ireland - place of
supply is Ireland; and

+ where money transfer services that are provided to a person in Ireland are used and enjoyed in Ireland, the
place of supply of related intermediary services to a principal outside the EU will be treated as supplied in
Ireland.

Ireland introduced the following use & enjoyment provision on the basis of Article 59a(a) VAT Directive:

+ hiring of a means of transport that is supplied in Ireland but where the services are used and enjoyed
outside the EU - place of supply is outside the EU (applies to supplies made to taxable and non-taxable
persons).

4. Chargeable event & Chargeability to VAT

4.1 Principles

‘The general principle is that in the case of a supply of goods, the time of supply is when the actual transfer
of ownership of the goods by agreement occurs (when the goods are supplied). In the case of a supply of
services, the time of supply is when the services are supplied.

However, where an invoice is required to be issued, then the VAT is due on the date that the invoice is issued,
or if not issued on time, the latest date by which it should have issued. The latest date for issuing an invoice is
the 15" of the month following the month in which the supply occurred.

4.2 Advance payments

In situations where a payment is received in advance of the supply being made, then the time of supply
for VAT purposes is the time the payment is received. An invoice must be issued in respect of the advance
payment by the 15" of the month following the month in which the payment was received.

4.3 Continuous supplies

‘The VAT Directive provides that continuous supplies of goods and services over a period of time are regarded
as being completed at least at intervals of one year and under Irish VAT law, this rule applies in relation to
supplies of telecommunications services, gas and electricity (where such supplies are made to unregistered
customers, the VAT becomes due when a bill is issued provided it is issued at least once every 3 months). The
normal rules apply in all other cases.

44 Cash accounting

Traders can account for VAT on the cash receipts basis provided certain conditions are met; the total turnover
from supplies is less than EUR 2 million or less than 90% of turnover relates to supplies to unregistered
persons or persons who are not entitled to claim a full VAT deduction. The cash receipts basis does not apply
in the case of supplies between connected persons, in respect of imports or in respect of intra-Community
acquisitions.

5. Taxable amount

5.1 Bad Debt Relief

Ireland has provisions for bad debt relief for accountable persons that operate the “invoice basis” of
accounting for VAT and that meet the conditions set out in legislation (the relief is not applicable to taxable
persons that operate the “cash receipts” basis of VAT accounting).

Ireland | 299

--- Page 116 ---
‘The obligations to be satisfied by the accountable person seeking to claim the relief include that:

+ they have taken all reasonable steps to recover the bad debt;
+ the debt is allowable as a deduction for Corporation Tax or Income Tax purposes;

+ the bad debt has been written off in the financial accounts (it cannot be a “doubtful debt”):

+ the person from whom the debt is due is unconnected to the accountable person;

+ ifpartial payment has been received the relief must be pro-rated; and

+ if the debt is written off and (partial) payment is received, the relief claimed must be repaid.

The claim is made through the VAT3 retum by increasing the input VAT figure in the T2 box of the return,
An adjustment is made if payment is subsequently received + his is also done through the VAT3 return by
reducing the figure in the T2 box of the return. There is no specific time limit for making a claim for bad debt
relief but the 4-year rule applicable to refunds must be taken into account.

There is an obligation to keep relevant records which could be examined in the event of an Irish Revenue
audit, The records must contain the following information:

* name and address of the debtor;
+ nature of the goods and services;
© date debt incurred;

+ date debt written off;

+ copy VAT invoice; and
«record of VAT accounted for.

Objective evidence of steps taken to recover the bad debt must be retained.

5.2 Cash discounts

Assume that the supplier sends the following invoice:

“Supply of goods EUR 1,000
23% VAT EUR _230
Total to be paid EUR 1,230

If payment is received by us within the next 14 days, you can subtract 2% of the invoice as a cash discount.”

Payment is indeed received within 14 days. In that case the supplier has to pay EUR 230 in its VAT return.
The customer can deduct EUR 230 in its VAT return. Therefore, the supplier has paid too much VAT and

the customer has deducted too much. If the supplier is accounting for VAT on the moneys received basis,

the supplier must issue a credit note showing VAT where the discount is allowed following the issue of the
invoice. A credit note must also be issued in the case of a supplier who accounts for VAT on the invoice basis.
However, where the supplier operates the invoice basis and both parties agree in writing not to make any
change to the VAT shown on the original invoice, there is no need to issue a credit note in respect of the VAT.

5.3 Open Market Value

Open market value can be imposed by Irish Revenue on supplies of goods and services between connected
parties in order to ensure the correct collection of VAT.

Irish Revenue may impose market value if they are satisfied that the actual consideration in relation to the
supply between the connected parties is either higher or lower than open market value.

In order to be ‘connected’ for the application of the open market value rule, the supplier and the recipient

of the goods and services must be connected by financial or legal ties, being party to any agreement,
undertaking, promise or understanding (whether express or implied and whether legally enforceable or not)
or either the supplier or the recipient (of the supply of goods or services) must exercise control over the other.
‘Control’ for these purposes means the power to control the affairs of the other party.

300 | Ireland

--- Page 117 ---
»  ifactual consideration is lower than open market value, market value can be imposed in instances where:
+ he recipient of the supply must have less than 100% VAT recovery entitlement on the supply or must
bea flat-rate farmer; or
+ the supplier is making a VAT exempt supply and the supplier is engaged in any non-deductible
business activities or is a “flat-rate” farmer.

+ If the actual consideration is higher than open market value, for market value to be applied, the supplier
must be a flat-rate farmer or must be engaged in non-deductible business activities.

5.4 Returnable packaging

The Irish Deposit Return Scheme (the “DRS”) came into operation in Ireland on 1 February 2024, The
DRS requires that a deposit (of 15c or 25c) is charged when drink products are supplied in certain single-
use containers (cans and plastic bottles), and the deposit is later refunded to a person who returns the empty
container for recycling/reuse. The refundable deposit is charged by relevant suppliers at each stage of the
supply chain in the State: manufacturer or importer, wholesalers, retailers, etc. Under the DRS, the deposit
is added to the price of the goods by the person who first supplies the drink product in the State (i., the
manufacturer or the importer), and by any subsequent supplier (e.g. a wholesaler, distributer, retailer). Once
the drink has been consumed, if the empty container is returned under the Scheme, then the deposit will be
refunded.

Businesses supplying DRS products have no VAT liability relating to the deposit. A VAT liability arises on the
deposits relating to containers that are not returned to the DRS. Under VAT law, only the Scheme Operator
must account for and pay VAT relating to deposits on unreturned containers. This liability does not affect the
consumer or any of the businesses in the supply chain for the product.

6. VAT rates and exemptions

61 Standard rate

‘The standard rate of VAT in Ireland is currently 23%. A temporary rate of 21% applied in the period 1
September 2020 to 28 February 2021.

6.2 Reduced rate

Reduced rates in Ireland are as follows.
A reduced rate of 13.5% applies to the following types of goods and services in Ireland:

+ certain agricultural goods and services;

+ waste collection and recycling services;

+ VATable supplies of immovable property;

* supplies of coal, peat and other solid fuels, electricity and gas;

+ supplies of certain photographic and related supplies;

+ — short-term hiring of cars, pleasure boats, caravans and mobile homes;

+ repair and maintenance of movable goods;

+ services consisting of the care of the human body, including services supplied in the course of a health
studio business or similar business;

* — veterinary services;

+ non-oral contraceptive products;

+ children’s car safety seats;

« hot drinks and hot takeaway food;

+ vending machine sales;

+ meals in cafes and restaurants:

+ hotel rooms, guesthouses, caravan parks, campsites;

Ireland | 301

--- Page 118 ---
+ admission to cinemas, theatres, certain musical performances, exhibitions, museums, cultural, artistic or
scientific events, amusement park services;

+ certain printed matter, inchiding newspapers, brochures, leaflets, catalogues, programs, maps (but
excluding books or advertising material);

* membership or admission to commercial sports facilities;

+ commercial golf club membership, green fees, driving range fees and incidental equipment hire; and

+ hairdressing and beautician services.

The second reduced rate of 9% now applies to the following types of goods and services in Iretand:

+ periodicals;

+ e-periodicals (excluding those wholly or predominantly devoted to advertising or consisting of audio or
video content); and

* the provision by a person of facilities for sporting purposes (other than for a profit making organisation).

There is a further reduced rate of 4.8% that applies to supplies of livestock and a flat rate compensation
percentage for farmers of 5.1% (with effect from 1 January 2025).

7. Exemptions

7.1 Exemptions with right to deduction (zero rate)

The zero rate of Irish VAT may be applied to supplies of goods and services including:

+ exports and intra-Community supplies of goods;

+ — imports of goods that are consigned to another EU Member State;

+ services relating to vessels and aircraft including the supply, modification, repair, maintenance, chartering
and hiring of seagoing vessels, related equipment and supplies for the fuelling and provisioning of certain
vessels and aircraft;

+ certain intermediary services;

+ certain supplies of food and drink;

+ certain supplies of printed matter;

+ children’s clothing and footwear;

+ supplies of oral medicine for humans and certain animals, and the supply of certain medical equipment;

+ — supply of audiobooks and e-books;

+ supply and installation of solar panels on school buildings;

+ supplies of fertilisers, feeding stuff and certain seeds;

* personal protection equipment (PPE);

* thermometers;

+ hand sanitiser; medical ventilators and specialist respiratory equipment such as respirators for intensive
and sub-intensive care and other oxygen therapy apparatus including oxygen tents and oxygen in certain
specified circumstances.

In relation to the zero rating of goods that are to be exported or dispatched out of Ireland, the supplier should

retain proof of transport of the goods out of the State. For intra~-Community dispatches, the supplier is obliged

to confirm that the customer has a valid VAT number and retain proof that the goods left Ireland.

7.1.1 Warehousing

7.1.1.1 VAT warehouse
Ireland does not currently operate a dedicated VAT warehouse regime.

The supply of alcohol products within an approved excise tax warehouse is disregarded for Irish VAT
purposes. The importation or intra-Community acquisition of alcoho! goods into an excise tax warehouse is
similarly disregarded for VAT purposes.

7.1.1.2 Bonded (customs) warehouse

Treland operates a customs warehousing regime under which imports into an approved warehouse delays

302 | Ireland

--- Page 119 ---
the import VAT and customs liability until the goods are released out of the warehouse for the EU market.
‘Warehouses can be public, where they are used to store goods on behalf of any accountable person, or
private warehouses, which are reserved for use by authorised accountable persons. Within the public’private
categories there are six different types of warehouses in Ireland, A to F. There is no limit on the time that
goods may be stored in these warehouses.

Goods that are bought and sold within an Irish customs warehouse are subject to VAT.

7.2 Exemptions without right to deduction

Schedule | of the VAT Consolidation Act 2010 sets out the activities which are exempt from VAT. Examples
of such exempt activities are:

+ public postal services;

* certain medical and related services;

+ professional dental or optical services;

+ the provision by a recognised body (as specifically defined) of children’s or young people’s education,
school or university education, or vocational training or retraining (including the supply of goods and
services incidental to that provision, other than the supply of research services);

+ catering services supplied to patients of a hospital or nursing home in the hospital or nursing home, or to
students at their school;

+ the provision of national broadcasting and television services, excluding advertising;

+ certain financial and insurance services;

+ the provision of services by a funeral undertaking;

+ transporting passengers and their accompanying baggage; and

* certain property transactions.

7.3 Options for taxation

An option to tax applies only to the following exempt activities:

+ supplies of investment gold (a waiver of exemption can be applied for);

+ letting of immovable property (which does not constitute a freehold equivalent interest); and

+ sale of exempt immovable property (this must be done by way of a joint option to tax in writing by both
parties. It is usually evidenced in the contract for sale), Both parties exercising the joint option to tax are
required to be taxable persons and carrying on a business in the State.

8. Liability

8.1 Reverse charge

There are certain instances where the customer of the supply of goods or services is required to account for
VAT on the reverse charge basis rather than the supplier charging VAT to the customer.

Under Irish legislation, cross-border services supplied to a person that is engaged in an economic activity (ic.
is a taxable person) will be subject to a reverse charge (unless the exceptions to this general rule apply). Ifthe
recipient is not engaged in an economic activity, the service will be supplied where the supplier is established.
A clear reference to the application of the reverse charge should be noted on the invoice issued. This reverse
charge applies in all EU Member States and follows from Articles 44 and 196 EU VAT Directive. In addition
there is also the reverse charge for the supply of natural gas and electricity supplied by non-resident suppliers
to “taxable dealers” in Ireland.

For services which are connected with immovable property supplied by non-established suppliers, a reverse
charge obligation arises for established taxable persons or public bodies except where the services are (i) a

provision of accommodation in a hotel or guesthouse or in an establishment having a similar function, or in
a holiday camp or a site developed for use as a camping site, (ii) the supply of telecommunications services,

Ireland | 303

--- Page 120 ---
radio or television broadcasting services or electronically supplied services, together with the provision
of accommodation of the kind specified in (i), where the supply is by the provider of that accommodation
acting in his or her own name, and (iii) a supply of services involving the preparation and co-ordination
of construction work (including a supply of services of architects and of persons who provide on-site
supervision).

8.1.1 General reverse charge mechanism - non-resident suppliers (Article 194 EU VAT Directive)
Ireland did not implement a reverse charge for the domestic supply of goods by non-resident suppliers, other
than for installation supplies. There is a reverse charge for non-resident suppliers that supply goods which
require installation provided the customer in Ireland is a taxable person or a public body established in
Ireland.

8.1.2 Reverse charge mechanism - specific domestic rules (Article 199 EU VAT Directive)
Ireland also has local reverse charges for certain types of supplies including the following:

+ certain supplies of immovable goods to the National Asset Management Agency;

+ supplies of greenhouse gas emissions between taxable persons that conduct businesses in Ireland;

+ supplies of construction services by a subcontractor to a principal which are within the scope of Relevant
Contracts Tax. The subcontractor can be established outside of Ireland for the reverse charge to apply.
If the overseas supplier is the principal in receipt of the construction services then it will be obliged to
register for Irish VAT in order to operate the reverse charge on the scrvices received, whether supplied by
an Irish or an overseas subcontractor;

+ supplies of scrap metal between taxable persons that conduct businesses in Ireland; and

+ supplies of construction services and engineering works between connected persons.

The application of these reverse charges is mandatory where the conditions are satisfied.

The law in relation to these reverse charges, in particular any related to property, are complex and the
legislation should be reviewed in detail.

8.2 di nt and several liability

In the context of VAT groups, cach member of an Irish VAT group is jointly and severally liable tor the VAT
liabilities of the group under Irish VAT law.

‘There is also an anti-avoidance provision in Irish law which provides that where VAT bas been fraudulently
evaded, an accountable person who knowingly or recklessly participated in transactions connected to that
fraudulent evasion is jointly and severally liable for the VAT that has not been accounted for. In other words,
a recipient of a supply may be jointly and severally liable with the supplier for VAT liabilities where they
knew or were reckless as to whether the supplier was engaged in evasion. Where particular goods or services
pass through a chain of transactions involving a number of persons, any or all of those persons who knew

or were reckless as to whether or not there was fraudulent evasion of VAT in relation to the supply of those
goods and/or services, may be assessed by Irish Revenue for the VAT arising on the basis that they are jointly
and severally liable for the unpaid VAT.

9: Recovery of input VAT

91 Non-recoverable input VAT
In Ireland, input VAT is not deductible on the following items:

+ food, drink, accommodation (other than for a qualifying conference) or any other personal services for the
accountable person, his agents or employees, except to the extent, if any, that such provision constitutes a
supply of services in respect of which the accountable person is accountable for VAT;

+ expenditure on the acquisition or development of immovable goods for any purpose other than the
accountable person’s business;

+ expenditure incurred by an accountable person on food or drink, or accommodation or other entertainment

304 | Ireland

--- Page 121 ---
services, where such expenditure forms all or part of the cost of providing an advertising service in
respect of which tax is due and payable by the accountable person;

+ entertainment expenses incurred by the accountable person, their agents or their employees;

+ purchase, hiring, intra-Community acquisition or importation of motor vehicles, other than as stock- in-
trade, a car hire business or use in a driving school business (although a 20% deduction may be claimed
for “qualifying vehicles” where strict conditions are satisfied);

+ purchase, intra~Community acquisition or importation of petrol, other than as stock-in-trade;

+ goods purchased by an accountable person which are subject to a VAT margin scheme; and

+ contract work involving the handing over of goods when such goods are themselves not deductible.

9.2 Excess input VAT

Excess input VAT is refunded by Irish Revenue, The excess input VAT will be refunded following the
submission of each VAT return, but the tax authorities may seek to review supporting documentation for any
claim.

93 Capital goods - adjustment periods

The adjustment period for immovable goods that are subject to the capital goods scheme are as follows:

= capital goods - 20 intervals from the date of completion; and
+ refurbishment capital goods - 10 intervals from the date of completion of the refurbishment.

An “interval” means either an initial interval, a second interval or a “subsequent interval”. An initial interval
is a period of 12 months from the date the capital good is completed or acquired. A second interval begins

on the day following the end of the initial interval for that capital good and ends on the final day of the
accounting year during which the second interval begins. Subsequent intervals mean each accounting year
of a capital goods owner in the adjustment period applicable to that capital good, which follows the second
interval, A refurbishment capital good is created when there is development on a previously completed capital
good.

A previously completed capital good is one which has reached a point of “completion” (per the definition of
“completion” in Irish VAT legislation) and further development work has been undertaken, such further work
creating another separate capital good which is referred to as a refurbishment capital good.

‘The capital goods scheme in Ireland does not extend to movable property or services.

94 VAT refund to EU taxable persons

Since | January 2010 VAT refund claims by non-resident taxable persons must be submitted through the
online portal of the tax authority in which the taxable person is established. For Irish accountable persons
who incur VAT in another EU Member State, the claim must be submitted online via ROS (Revenue-On-Line
System) and the relevant section is called EVR (Electronic VAT Refund).

When an application is submitted online, a message is forwarded to the applicant's ROS inbox stating

that their application has been received by Irish Revenue and that it has been forwarded to the relevant

EU Member State for refund. If an application is successful, a decision message will be forwarded to the
applicant’s ROS inbox. Payment will then be made (by electronic fund transfer) to the bank account provided
in the application. Invoices and importation documents are generally not required but can be forwarded with
the application as a scared attachment. These attachments must not exceed SMB in size. Irish Revenue may
also request additional information before a final decision is made on an application. The applicant is notified
directly via the contact details provided in its application i.e. e-mail or telephone. Irish Revenue must issue a
decision on the refund claim within 4 months of receipt of the claim, This period can be extended to 6 months
or 8 months in cases where Irish Revenue requests additional information.

‘The annual minimum limit for claims that are made for a calendar year or the remainder of a calendar year
is EUR 50. The interim minimum limit for claims that are made for less than a calendar year but at least 3
months is EUR 400.

Ireland | 305

--- Page 122 ---
‘The minimum period for making a claim is 3 months within a calendar year (or less if it starts after | October)
and the maximum claim period is onc ycar. The deadline for submitting the claim is 30 September of the year
following the calendar year in which the VAT was incurred. This is a strict deadline.

ROS allows for the submission of a maximum of 5 applications to each EU Member State in a calendar year.
In the event that the claimant is not successful, where Irish Revenue either refuuse the claim in full or in part,
the decision by Irish Revenue can be appealed. The time limit for submitting an appeal is within 30 days after
the notification.

‘The same rules which apply to domestic taxable persons as regards the non-deductible items, equally apply to
non-established taxable persons reclaiming Irish VAT. The non-deductible items are listed above at 9.1.

For additional information please refer to:
hittps://tinyurl.combyck8yn8w

95 VAT refund to non-EU taxable persons

The electronic refuund system which applies to EU taxable persons does not apply in the case of non-EU taxable
persons. A paper application form must be completed which is called a VAT60OEC and is available on the Irish
Revenue website (see link below). The rules apply to claimants conducting business outside the FU. Ireland
provides reciprocity where (he country of the claimant has a similar scheme for refunding to claimants in Ireland,

The application must be accompanied by original invoices showing the amount of VAT paid. If the non-EU
taxable person wants the original invoices returned to him, a set of photocopies should be included with the
application. Invoices should contain the following particulars:

+ the supplier's name, address and VAT registration number;

+ the name and address of the person to whom the goods or services were supplied;
+ the date of issue of the invoice;

+ asequential number which uniquely identifies the invoice;

+ adetailed description of the goods and services supplied, and

+ the total cost, the rate of VAT and the VAT charged.

The application must be accompanied by a certificate issued by the relevant authority of the country in which
the claimant is established stating the economic activity in which the claimant is engaged and providing the
following information:

+ the name, address and official stamp of the authority which issued same;

+ the name and address of the claimant; and

+ the claimant’s VAT registration number and a statement as to the nature of the business conducted by the
claimant.

However, if the claimant has already forwarded such a certificate to Irish Revenue, it is not necessary to
produce a new certificate for a period of one year from the date of issue.

The application should refer to purchases of goods or services invoiced, during a period of not less than 3
months or not more than 1 calendar year. However, it may relate to a period of less than 3 months where this
period represents the remainder of a calendar year. It may also relate to invoices not covered by previous
applications and concerning transactions made during the calendar year in question.

Applications must be submitted within 6 months after the end of the calendar year in which the tax became
chargeable.

‘The total amount of VAT claimed must not be less than EUR 400 if the claim is for a period of at least 3

months but not more than a calendar year and not less than EUR 50 if the claim is for a period of less than 3
months, being all that remains of the calendar year.

306 | Ireland

--- Page 123 ---
The same rules which apply to domestic taxable persons as regards the non-deductible items equally apply to
foreign taxable persons reclaiming Irish VAT. The non-deductible items are listed above at 9.1.

The relevant form VAT60 OEC can be downloaded at:
http:/owwe.revenue.ie/en/tax/vat/forms/index.html

The completed claim should be sent to:

Office of the Revenue Commissioners
Collector General's Division
Sarsfield House

Francis Street

Limerick

V94 R972

Republic of Ireland

10. Administrative obligations

10.1 Invoices

An Irish VAT invoice should include the following in order to constitute a valid VAT invoice:

+ name and address of the supplier;

+ VAT registration number of the supplier;

+ name and address of the person to whom the goods or services were supplied;

+ sequential number that uniquely identifies the invoice;

+ date of issue of the invoice;

+ — date of supply of the goods or services (or the date of prepayment/payment on account) if different than
the date of the invoice;

+ adescription of the goods or services supplied;

* quantity or volume of the goods supplied;

+ VAT exclusive price;

+ VAT rate(s) applicable:

+ VAT amount charged at each rate (except reverse charge supplies);

+ VAT number of customer in other EU Member State if invoice relates to reverse charge supply of goods
or services in relation to which the customer is Jiable to pay VAT;

+ VAT number of supplier and the customer in other EU Member in order to validly zero rate an invoice for
intra-Community supply purposes; and

+ indication that the invoice relates to an intra-Community supply of goods or reverse charge services (if
applicable).

10.1.1 Time limits

Invoices are generally issued at the time of supply of goods, but it is more difficult to identify a tax point for
ongoing supplies of services. Notwithstanding this, an invoice must be issued by the latest the 15" day of the
month following the month in which a tax point is triggered.

10.1.2 Currency

Invoices are to be issued in the currency of Ireland, which is EUR. But if an invoice is issued in a non-Euro
denominated currency, the invoice must contain the corresponding figures in EUR.

10.1.3 Conversion and exchange rate

There are rules to be adhered to for converting foreign currency amounts. The selling rate recorded by the
Central Bank of Ireland or the European Central Bank (ECB) at the time the VAT becomes due should be
used. It is possible to use other methods but this must be agreed in advance with Irish Revenue.

Ireland | 307

--- Page 124 ---
10.1.4 Simplified invoice

The Irish VAT legislation permits the issue of a simplified invoice, credit note, settlement voucher or debit
note provided certain conditions are met, namely, the amount of the invoice is less than EUR 100, or there are
certain practices (commercial, technical or administrative) in a particular business sector that make it difficult
to comply with the legislative invoicing requirements. A simplified invoice must however include certain
items at a minimum:

+ the date of issue of the invoice;

* the sequential number of the invoice:

+ the name, address and VAT registration number of the supplier;

+ the description of the supplies made; and

+ the VAT payable or the VAT exclusive consideration for the supply.

10.1.5 Self-billing
Self-billing may be used in Ireland. The conditions to enable self-billing include:

+ _ prior written agreement between the supplier and the customer;

+ the customer is VAT registered;

+ the details required to be on the invoice are satisfied by the customer;

+ agreed procedures are in place for the acceptance by the supplier of the validity of the invoice; and
* the invoice must state that the invoice has been “self-billed”.

‘The invoice is deemed to be issued by the supplier once the invoice is accepted by the supplier in accordance
with the agreed procedures,

10.1.6 Storage of invoices

Invoices and other books and records must be kept for a period of 6 years from the date of the latest
transaction to which the records, invoices or any other documents relate.

In relation to records for the acquisition or development of immovable goods, a taxable person must retain
records for the duration of its interest in the immovable goods plus a further period of 6 years.

For taxable persons that have exercised a waiver of exemption from VAT in respect of short-term lettings,
records must be retained for the duration of the waiver plus a further period of 6 years.

The requirement to keep records also applies to the following:

+ arecord relating to the exercising and terminating of a landlord’s option to tax;

+ acapital good record;

* arecord relating to a joint option to tax;

* adocument issucd in respect of a VATable surrender or assignment;

+ records in relation to a “qualifying conference” for the purposes of claiming an input VAT credit; and
+ — records in relation to transactions in investment gold.

However, these obligations do not apply if Irish Revenue have notified the person that retention is not
required,

Paper invoices must be stored in the original form, i.e. the invoices that have been issued in paper form must
be stored in paper form. Electronic invoices can be stored in paper form or in electronic form. Copies of
original paper invoices produced by microfilming or other copying processes are not acceptable.

Legislation does not require records to be stored at a particular location or jurisdiction. However, when Irish
Revenue wish to inspect records, the taxable person is obliged to make records available for inspection. Irish
Revenue personnel may travel abroad to inspect records that are stored overseas, although this would only
arise in exceptional circumstances.

308 | Ireland

--- Page 125 ---
10.1.7 Electronic invoicing

Electronic invoicing can only be used where there is prior agreement between the issuer and recipient. The
electronic system used must meet certain specifications. The system must be able to:

+ produce, retain and store electronic records and messages in such form and containing such particulars as
are required for VAT purposes, and make them available to Irish Revenue on request;

+ reproduce in paper or electronic format any electronic record or message required to be produced,
retained or stored; and

+ maintain electronic records in a manner that allows their retrieval by reference to the name of the person
who issues or receives the message or the date of the message or the unique identification number of the
message.

Parties to the invoice must be able to verify the authenticity of origin, integrity of content and a reliable audit
trail must exist between the parties.

Batch invoicing is also possible, whereby an accountable person issues a batch of invoices electronically to a
customer where the invoices record details that are common to al] the invoices only once per transmission

10.2 VAT compliance

10.2.1 VAT return period

‘Taxable periods in Ireland are generally bi-monthly - January / February, March / April, May / June, July /
August, September / October, November / December. However, alternative taxable periods may apply.

‘Accountable persons in a permanent VAT recoverable position may apply to file monthly VAT returns, but
approval is subject to review by the Office of the Collector General.

Trish Revenue may offer accountable persons the option to file annual VAT returns. If accepted, accountable
persons must make a monthly instalment of their annual VAT liability via direct debit. An accountable person
must ensure that the amount of the direct debit is sufficient so as not to result in a shortfall of VAT owing

at year end. If the shortfall is more than 20% of the overall VAT, then liability interest is payable from the
middle of the year.

VAT retums may be filed on a 4-monthly basis where the annual VAT liability for the taxable person is
between EUR 3,001 and EUR 14,400, Bi-annual / 6-monthly VAT retums may be filed if VAT payments are
less than EUR 3,000 annually.

The same taxable periods apply for domestic and foreign registered taxable persons.
Electronic filing of VAT returns is now mandatory for most accountable persons. This is done through the
Revenue-On-Line system (ROS).

10.2.2 Filing of a VAT return and payment

The VAT filing and payment deadlines in Ireland are the same for domestic accountable persons and non-
established taxable persons.

The filing deadline is the 19” day of the month following the end of the taxable period, but electronic returns

must be filed on ROS by the 23" day of the month following the end of the taxable period. E.g. an electronic

return for the January / February taxable period must be filed by 23 March. Electronic filing of VAT retarns is
mandatory. Where interest is applied for late payment, it applies from the 19% day, not the 23“ day.

VAT returns in Ireland require completion of the following information:

+ Box TL: VAT on sales = total VAT charged on sales in the period;
+ Box T2: VAT on purchases = total deductible VAT incurred;

Ireland | 309

--- Page 126 ---
+ Box T3: VAT payable = excess of VAT on sales over purchases (may be ‘nil”);

+ Box T4: VAT repayable = excess of VAT on purchases over sales (may be ‘nil’);

+ Box El: Intra-Community supplies of goods = the net total of goods sold to customers in other EU
Member States;

+ Box E2: Intra-Community acquisitions of goods = the net total of goods purchased from suppliers in other
EU Member States;

+ Box ESI: Intra-Community supply of services = the net total of services supplied to customers in other
EU Member States;

+ Box ES2: Intra-Community acquisition of services = the net total of services received from suppliers in
other EU Member States;

* Box PAI: Imports = the net value (plus carriage, freight and insurance) of imports from third countries.

10.2.3 European sales listing
European sales listings are referred to as VAT Information Exchange System (VIES) returns in Ireland.

In general, VIES returns for supplies of goods should be filed monthly, but accountable persons whose intra-
Community supplies of goods do not exceed the threshold of EUR 50,000 in any of the previous 4 quarters
may file VIES returns either on a quarterly basis, or annually in certain circumstances.

VIES returns for intra-Community supplies of services are generally filed quarterly, but accountable persons
may also file monthly VIES returns, if preferred. Annual returns may also be filed in certain circumstances.

VIES must be filed by the 23rd day of the month following the end of the reporting period and must be filed
online. Agents may file VIES returns for customers.

10.2.4 National recapitulative statement

‘There are no national recapitulative statements in Ireland. However, there is an annual statistical VAT return
to be filed which is referred to as the annual Return of Trading Details. This return is filed annually and
contains the net purchases and sales broken down by VAT rate.

10.2.5 Tax assessment period

The assessment period in Ireland is 4 years from the end of a taxable period.

10.3 Penalties

10.3.1 Default penalties for late registration
The statutory penalty which applies for failure to register for VAT within the required time period is EUR
4,000.

10.3.2 Default penalties for not filing a VAT return or a European sales listing on time

The statutory penalty for failure to file a VAT retum is EUR 4,000 per return.

The statutory penalty for failure to file a European sales listing (a VIES return) is EUR 4,000 per return.

10.3.3 Default penalties for not paying VAT on time to the VAT authorities

‘The late payment of VAT will be liable to interest of 0.0274% per day (approx. 10% per annum) that the VAT
liability remains unpaid in addition to a potential penalty of EUR 4,000 for failing to file the return on time.

10.3.4 Default penalties on VAT assessments when VAT is not reported correctly

In addition to the above penalties, the Irish Revenue can impose “tax-geared” penalties where an accountable
person has deliberately or carelessly filed incorrect VAT returns. The penalties may be mitigated where
different levels of disclosure are made by the accountable person and the level of cooperation received by
Irish Revenue. Disclosures may be prompted or unprompted, qualifying or non-qualifying. While penalties
may be mitigated, interest is not as it is statutorily imposed. A disclosure is treated as prompted when it is
made following receipt of notification of an Irish Revenue audit. A disclosure is unprompted if it is made
prior to receipt of an audit or investigation notification.

310 | Ireland

--- Page 127 ---
Under these provisions an accountable person can also be liable to penalties of EUR 3,000 where it has acted
carelessly or EUR 5,000 where it has acted deliberately in the production, sending or otherwise making use of
any incorrect invoices, registration number, credit note, debit note, receipt, account, voucher, bank statement,
estimate, book, document or record.

10.4 Intrastat

Intrastat returns are required to be filed on ROS on a monthly basis by accountable persons that exceed the
relevant thresholds.

10.4.1 Intrastat threshold

‘The arrivals threshold is EUR 750,000 per calendar year, The dispatch threshold is EUR 750,000 per
calendar year. A more detailed Intrastat retum is required where arrivals exceed EUR 5 million per annum or
dispatches exceed EUR 35 million per annum.

10.4.2 Intrastat data to be reported

Accountable persons must show the value of goods received from and dispatched to other EU Member States
in Boxes E] and E2 in their VAT return. However, if the above thresholds are exceeded, accountable persons
must file detailed monthly Intrastat returns. It is possible that accountable persons are only required to file a
detailed Intrastat return for arrivals or dispatches only, not both.

Information generally required:

+ EU Member State of origin/destination;

+ VAT number of the Intrastat trader and the declarant (if different to the Intrastat trader);
+ VAT number of the customer;

= nature of the transaction;

+ mode of transport:

+ 8-digit commodity code of the goods;

+ customs regime code;

* net weight of the goods: and

+ invoice value of the goods in EUR.

Returns must be filed by the 23 working day immediately following the end of the month to which
the return relates. A trader may appoint one or more agents to file Intrastat returns. VAT group remitters may
submit detailed monthly returns for the VAT group, although prior approval is required.

A trader who is registered for VAT in Ireland and registered in another Member State because of distance
sales to that Member State, must include the value of distance sales in the Intrastat Box E1 of the VAT3
return, Where a trader who is registered for VAT in Ireland makes distance sales to other Member States
but does not exceed the registration threshold in that Member State, Irish VAT must be accounted for on
the supply of goods. The VAT on the distance sales should be input in Box T1 (not in Box E1). A trader,
registered in another Member State who is also registered in Ireland because of distance sales to Ireland,
should include the value of distance sales in the Intrastat Box E2 of the VATS return.

A detailed Guide to VIES and Intrastat in Ireland can be found at hitps://tinyurl.com/48pjxkax

10.5 Additional Compliance Requirements

Ther are no additional requirements.

Information recieved from:

Dara Higgins
Matheson LLP
dara higgins@matheson.com
www.matheson.com
Ireland | 311

--- Page 128 ---
312 | Ireland

--- Page 129 ---
Italy

The European Union (EU) VAT Directive has been implemented in Italy through the DPR 26 October 1972,
no. 633 (hereafter referred to as “DPR 633/72” or “the VAT Law”). VAT is referred to in Italy as “Imposta sul
Valore Aggiunto” or “IVA”.

1. Taxable persons

1d Registration threshold & SME Scheme for domestic taxable persons

There is no registration threshold for established taxable persons. With respect to legal entities, VAT
registration is usually made through the registration of the entity with the Chamber of Commerce. The
following information must be provided for VAT registration to be performed directly by the Public Notary:

*  aregistration form;
* the by-laws; and
+ any authorizations required in connection with the business activities.

The same requirements apply to Italian branches of foreign companies.

With respect to individuals, a registration form must be filed electronically, by registered letter or directly
with the tax authorities. In case of individuals who also need to be registered at the Chamber of Commerce,
the VAT registration must be filed electronically.

Any change to the data reported in the form filed to register for VAT purposes must be communicated within
30 days from the date of the change.

12 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for foreign taxable persons

There is no registration threshold for non-established taxable persons. However, Italy introduced an
exemption for small and medium sized business per 1 January 2025.

In case of small enterprises established in another EU Member State, the SME scheme can be adopted
exclusively by a taxable natural person.

In particular, a taxable natural person established in another Member State of the European Union may apply

the relief regime in the territory of the Italian State if the below conditions are met:

+ in the preceding calendar year (N-1), the annual turnover achieved in the European Union did not exceed
EUR 100,000;

+ in the preceding calendar year (N-1), the annual turnover achieved in the territory of the Italian State did
not exceed EUR 85,000 (there are no sectoral thresholds in Italy);

+ in the current calendar year (N), up to the date of notification, the turnover in the European Union does
not exceed EUR 100,000;

+ it has submitted the prior notification to its Member State of establishment;

+ itis identified, for the purposes of applying the relief arrangements, by the identification number ‘EX’
exclusively in the Member State of establishment.

If the exemption cannot be applied, non-established taxable persons must apply for the VAT registration when
they perform taxable business transactions in Italy (i.¢., the application form should be filed no later than 30
days before the starting date of the activity).

Non-established taxable persons may opt for:

+ the appointment of a VAT representative, which is mandatory for non-EU taxable persons; or
+ — the direct identification, which is allowed only for taxable persons established in an EU Member State and

Italy | 313

--- Page 130 ---
non-BU persons who are established in countries with which the mutual assistance agreement has been
signed

In the case of a VAT representative, a mandate for the appointment of an Italian VAT representative must
be granted with a proxy. The date of the appointment must be certified. In order to do so, the signature on
the proxy must be legalized either by the Italian Consulate or by a local public notary. If the proxy is signed
before a public notary, the notary’s signature should be certified by an ‘apostille’ (according to The Hague
Convention) of the local competent authority.

If the proxy is not written in Italian, it must be translated and the translation must be sworn before an Italian
Consulate or an Italian Court. The VAT representative will then file the VAT registration form.

New fulfilments and requirements have been introduced for tax representatives and for non-resident entities in
the EU and the European Economic Area if they are already registered or intend to register for VIES in order
to carry out IC transactions.

Guarantee and requirements for VAT representatives

According to the ministerial decree dated 9 December 2024 published in the Oficial Gazette on 19 December

2024 (implementing the provisions provided for by Legislative Decree 12 February 2024, no. 13), VAT

representatives are required:

+ to certify to the tax Authority the presence of specific subjective requirements (such as no convictions for
financial crimes etc.); and

+ to provide a guarantee in favor of tax Authority,

‘The operational aspects to apply the provisions of the decree shall be provided by a measure not yet issued as
at 11 March 2025 (deadline for its issuance is 120 days from 19 December 2024).

Registration for VIES - Guarantee for non-resident entities in the EU and the European Economic
Area through VAT representative

The ministerial decree dated 4 December 2024 published in the Official Gazette on 13 December 2024
(implementing the provisions provided for by Legislative Decree 12 February 2024, no. 13) provides for the
tules regarding the guarantee to be filed by subjects not resident in the EU or in one of the States adhering to
the European Economic Area who intend to carry out intra~-Community transactions and operate through a tax
representative.

The operational aspects to apply the provisions of the decree shall be provided by a measure not yet issued as
at 11 March 2025 (deadline for its issuance is 120 days as from 13 December 2024).

In case of direct registration, the following documentation must be provided:

*  aregistration form;

+ an updated certificate issued by the foreign tax authorities stating that the taxable person is registered for
VAT purposes;

+ if legal entity, an updated certificate issued by the foreign Chamber of Commerce (or similar competent
authority) reporting the data of the entity and those relating to the legal representative(s) duly authorized
to sign and act on behalf of the company;

+ both certificates must be translated into Italian and signed by the translator;

* a copy of the identity document of the translator;

* acopy of an identity document of the legal representative; and

+ a statement signed by the legal representative, whereby the reasons for the request of VAT registration are
explained, including a description of any transactions eventually carried out before the VAT registration,
as well as the request of inclusion of the VAT registration number in the VIES system, should intra-
Community transactions be performed, with an indication of the expected amount of intra-Community
transactions. This statement must also be translated into Italian and signed by the translator.

In case of direct registration, the documentation must be filed exclusively with the Centro Operativo di
Pescara. The contact details are as follows:

314 | Italy

--- Page 131 ---
Agenzia delle Entrate

Centro Operativo di Pescara Area Controlli Servizio Identificazione non Residenti
Via Rio Sparto 21 65129 PESCARA

Italy

e-mail: cop.pescara@agenziaentrate. it

The registration form and instructions can be downloaded at the following website: htps://tinyurl.com/4v4vb6br

The time period for the attribution of the VAT registration number is usually between 2 weeks and | month,
depending on the number of requests received by the Centro Operativo of Pescara at the time of filing the
VAT registration form.

Ifa fiscal representative is appointed, then the competent office is determined by the place of establishment of
the fiscal representative.

Any change to the data reported in the form filed to register for VAT purposes must be communicated within
30 days from the date of the change.

13. VAT grouping
Art. 11 of the EU VAT Directive 2006/112 has been implemented in Italy.

As an alternative to VAT grouping, the VAT Law provides for the possibility offered to the companies
belonging to the same group, to compensate VAT liabilities with VAT credits among the companies included
in the VAT group (Italian VAT group settlement).

13.1 VAT grouping
VAT group members must be taxable persons established in the territory of the Italian State.

The possibility to join the VAT group is not allowed for:

* seats and fixed establishments located abroad;

+ entities subject to voluntary liquidation, seizure by order of the court; and

* entities subject to bankruptcy, arrangement before bankruptcy, compulsory administrative liquidation,
extraordinary administration.

In order to join the VAT group, two or more taxable persons established in Italy must be bound to one another
by financial, economic and organizational links. The said conditions must occur jointly.

‘The financial link is determined by the existence, already since the 1* July of the year preceding the one in
which the option is carried out, of shared control, defined as more than 50% of the shares of the members
being directly or indirectly held by the same person(s).

The economic fink is based on the activity carried out and occurs by reason of the same core business, or activities
complementary or interdependent or activities carried out for the benefit of one or more of the other members.

The organizational link is represented by the legal coordination according to the civil law or by the
coordination between the management.

In principle, ifa financial link is present, the other links are presumed to be present unless a tax ruling is filed
with the Tax Authority in order to demonstrate that they do not exist.

The option for the VAT grouping is filed electronically by the representative of the VAT group (i.e, the

controlling company):

+ from | January to 30 September with application of the regime starting with the year following the one in
which the option is filed; or

Italy | 315

--- Page 132 ---
+ from 1 October to 31 December with application of the regime starting with the second year following the
one in which the option is filed.

‘The option requires that the group and its members conform to the above-mentioned conditions in all 3 of the
areas specified.

Failure to conform by the group or by one or more of its members results in the disbanding of the group.

New members, originally excluded due to the lack of conformance to the conditions, join the VAT group as
from the year following the one in which the conditions are met. In this case, the option must be filed within
90 days from the date in which the conditions came into existence.

The option is valid for 3 years and automatically renewed unless it is revoked.

Intra-group transactions are not considered as supplies of goods or services for VAT purposes, while
transactions carried out with third parties by the members are deemed to be carried out by the VAT group.

The members of the VAT group are jointly and severally liable for payment of the VAT debts of the group,
penalties and interest.

1.3.2 Italian VAT group settlement

The ‘Italian VAT group settlement’ is an option (not a requirement) that can be put in place by companies
belonging to the same group, if the relevant conditions are met. Specifically, a controlling company and one or
more of its controlled subsidiaries (whereby the holding company must hold more than 50% of the voting rights
of the subsidiary from | July of the taxable year prior to the one in which the grouping takes place) can elect to
compute the amount of VAT due by ‘consolidating’ the monthly VAT amounts of the individual companies.

In other words, in each period, the amount of VAT due will be the net sum of debits and credits of the
companies that are elected to be part of the group. VAT credit carried forward and accrued before joining the
VAT group cannot be used.

The members of a VAT group are not considered a single taxable person. Each member retains its own VAT
registration number and carries out all the fulfilments provided for by the law (such as filing its own VAT
return, issuance of invoices with respect to intra-group transactions as well as with respect to transactions to
non-group members)

A VAT group is formed by the parent company, although there is no requirement to include all eligible
subsidiaries,

Alll the companies belonging to an Italian VAT group are fully, jointly and severally liable for the VAT
payments. The election must be made by the controlling company through the annual VAT return to be filed
in the tax period in which the VAT group settlement applies. The Italian tax authorities approved that an EU
company registered for VAT purposes in Italy can be part of'a VAT group.

‘Pure’ holding companies, not being taxable persons, cannot be a member of the VAT group. ‘Pure’ holding
companies are not considered to be taxable persons, unless the purpose of the possession of shareholdings
is to perform financial activities, to influence the activity of the controlled companies or to coordinate or
intervene in the management of the said companies.

14 Fiscal representative

A fiscal representative is mandatory for non-EU taxable persons when registering for VAT purposes. A fiscal
representative is jointly and severally liable with a client for payment of the VAT and penalties and in general
for any obligation arising from the Italian VAT law.

316 | Italy

--- Page 133 ---
In case of a fiscal representative appointed by a taxable person who is not resident in the EU or in one of the
States adhering to the European Economic Area, the inclusion in the VIES archive is subject to the issuance
of an appropriate guarantee,

2. Taxable transactions

21 Transfer of business

‘The transfer of a business (or part thereof) is not considered to be a supply of goods subject to VAT.

2.2 Supplies free of charge

‘The VAT Law provides for both free supplies of goods and destination of goods for private use or for
purposes other than business purposes.

In particular, the following operations are deemed to be supplies of goods:

+ the free supplies of goods except those whose production or trade is not within the scope of the enterprise
activity if their unit cost is not higher than € 50 and those for which no tax deduction, as provided for by
Art. 19, has been effected at the time of purchase or import, even if according to the option provided for
by Art. 36-bis; and

+ the use of goods for either private purposes or for other purposes than business purposes by the taxable
person. This also applies if this use is the result of cessation of the activity except for those goods for
which tax has not been deducted at the time of their purchase.

The VAT Law provides for free supply of services too.

In particular, the free supply of services with a value higher than € 50, even if effected for the private use of
the taxable person or free of charge for purposes other than those of his business, is subject to VAT if input
VAT was deducted on the goods and services used for this service free of charge.

The above rule does not apply to the supply of food in canteens and transport, teaching, educational and
recreational services, sanitary and social assistance in favour of the staff, and advertising in favour of
institutional activities of non-profit bodies and for messages spreading, representations, images or public
interest communications requested by the State or by Public Bodies.

2.3 Importation

2.3.1 Importation followed by an intra-Community supply

The VAT Law provides that the payment of VAT due on importation of goods released for free circulation

in Italy is suspended when the goods are transferred to another EU Member State. In order to qualify for the

suspension, the importer must provide to Customs the following:

+ VAT identification number;

* VAT identification number of the customer established in another EU Member State; and

+ upon request from the Customs, suitable evidence proving the effective delivery of the same goods to
another EU Member State.

2.3.2 Postponed accounting on importation

Italy has not implemented an import VAT postponed accounting scheme. The VAT must be paid at the time of
importation.

Italy | 317

--- Page 134 ---
3: Place of supply

3.1 Consignment and call-off stock

Italy has implemented the simplifications provided for call-off stock both for intra-Community acquisitions
and intra-Community supplies of goods as from | December 2021

If the relevant conditions are met, no intra~-Community acquisition of goods occurs in case of transfer of
goods by a VAT registered taxable person from one EU Member State to Italy in order to be therein supplied,
ata later stage and after arrival, to another taxable person who is entitled to take ownership of those goods in
accordance with an existing agreement between both taxable persons,

3.2 Installation supplies

The supply of goods delivered from another EU Member State to be assembled or installed in the territory
of the State by the supplier or on his behalf is considered a local supply of goods. Italian legislation does not
provide for a formal definition of the notion of ‘supply with installation or assembly’.

In case the customer is a taxable person established in Italy, VAT is due by the latter also in case the non-
resident supplier has an Italian VAT number. For the application of the reverse charge mechanism, see also
chapter 8.

33 Distance sales

The new e-commerce VAT rules in force as from | July 2021 have been implemented in Italy.

‘The distance selling threshold for sales to private consumers is equal to EUR 10,000.
Distance sales of goods as well as electronically supplied services, telecommunication and broadcasting
services have to be included in the said threshold.

Once the threshold is exceeded the supplier may either register directly in Italy or in his country of
establishment via OSS to account for Italian VAT for their distance sales to Italy.

A threshold of EUR 150 per consignment is provided for the application of the special scheme regarding
distance sales of imported goods.

3.4 Simplified triangulation rules

‘The simplified EU triangulation rules implomented under Italian VAT legislation comply with the EU VAT
Directive.

Taxable persons A, B and Cin the ABC transaction must be registered for VAT in different EU countries (i.e.
in Countries 1, 2 and 3), The goods must be transported directly from A in Country 1 to C in Country 3.

The simplified triangulation rules can be applied if (among other conditions):

+ Italy is the country of arrival of the goods;

+ the middleman (B) is not established in Italy; and

+ the middleman (B) issues an invoice without VAT but referring to a simplified triangulation and the VAT
liability of the last acquirer (C).

Where Italy is the EU Member State of arrival of the goods, the wording of the Italian legislation does not
preclude the application of the triangulation rules if the middleman (B) is VAT registered in Italy or in the
country of dispatch. In principle, the simplification is only applicable to transactions where 3 parties are
involved.

318 | Italy

--- Page 135 ---
35 Acquisition threshold

‘The threshold for the acquisition of goods by non-taxable legal persons, taxable persons engaged in exempt
activities and flat-rate farmers from suppliers established in another EU Member State is EUR 10,000.

3.6 Effective use and enjoyment

The effective use and enjoyment rules of Article 59a EU VAT Directive, have been implemented under the
Ttalian VAT Law with respect to the hiring of a means of transport.

In particular, in case of short-term hiring, the place of supply will be Italy if the means of transport is put at
the disposal of:

+ acustomer in Italy and the means of transport is used within the EU; or

* acustomer outside the EU and the means of transport is used in Italy.

The above rule is applicable in the case of any customer (both taxable and non-taxable persons).

In the case of long-term rental of means of transport, the place of supply is Italy for B2C long-term rental of
means of transport other than pleasure boats when rendered to:

customers who reside in Italy and use the means of transport in the EU; or

* customers who reside outside the EU and use the means of transport in Italy.

In case of long-term rental of pleasure boats, the place of supply is Italy for B2C long-term rental of pleasure

boats when the boat is put at the disposal of:

+ acustomer in Italy where the service is actually provided by a supplier established in Italy and the boat is
used in the EU;

+ acustomer in a non-EU country by a non-EU supplier established in the same non-EU country and the
boat is used in Italy;

+ acustomer who is an Italian resident in a country other than the country where the supplier is established,
and the boat is used in the EU; or

+ anon-EU customer in a country other than the country where the supplier is established, and the boat is
used in Italy.

Use and enjoyment rules are also applicable to B2C telecommunications and broadcasting services.
‘Telecommunications and broadcasting services provided to an Italian customer are subject to Italian VAT if
the service is used and enjoyed in the EU.

4, Chargeable event & chargeability of VAT

4.1 Principles
Supplies of immovable properties shall be deemed to be effected at the date on which the agreement
concerning the transfer is signed.

Supplies of goods shall be deemed to be effected at the time of delivery or forwarding.

Supplies of services shall be deemed to be effected when payment is received wholly or in part in respect of
the amount paid.

In case of Article 44 services, the services are deemed to be carried out when the services are completed. In
case the same services are supplied continuously, they are deemed to be carried out at the date of accrual of
the consideration.

If before the above events take place, the payment is made wholly or in part, the transaction shall be deemed
to have been carried out at the date of payment, but only in respect of the amount paid. The same services,
which are supplied continuously over a period of more than 1 year and which do not give rise to statements of

Italy | 319

--- Page 136 ---
account or payments during that period, shall be regarded as being completed on expiry of each calendar year
until such time as the supply of services comes to an end.

4.2 Advance payments

If before the delivery of goods takes place, an invoice is issued or payment is made wholly or in part, the
transaction shall be deemed to have been carried out at the date of issuance of the invoice or of payment, but
only in respect of the amount invoiced or paid.

Regarding the services, if the invoice is issued before the payment is carried out, the transaction shall be
deemed to have been carried out at the date of issuance of the invoice.

43 Continuous supplies

Continuous supplies (e.g. supplies of electricity for a certain period of time) of goods shall be deemed to be
effected at the date of payment.

44 Cash accounting

‘The cash accounting scheme is applicable to taxable persons with a VAT tumover in the previous year lower
than EUR 2,000,000 with respect to supplies of goods and services to taxable persons acting as such.

According to the cash accounting scheme, output VAT becomes due when the taxable person (the supplier

of goods or services) receives payment for his supply of goods or services (in any case, after | year from the
year the transaction is deemed to be carried out). On the other hand, VAT deduction is postponed until the
VAT on the goods or services supplied to the taxable person has been paid to its supplier. The cash accounting
scheme is not applicable to:

+ supplies to private consumers;
* transactions subject to another special regime (such as the margin scheme);
* transactions subject to the reverse charge;

+ intra-Community transactions, exports and other zero-rated transactions; and
+ imports and the release of goods from a VAT warehouse.

The option to use the cash accounting scheme must be communicated to the tax authorities in the annual
VAT return for the tax period in which the scheme has first been applied. The option for the cash accounting
scheme is then compulsory for at least 3 years unless the threshold of EUR 2,000,000 is exceeded.

5. Taxable amount

5.1 Bad debt relief

According to the VAT Law, the supplier of goods or services is allowed to recover the output VAT on sales
invoices, some of which are unpaid, (whether totally or partially) if specific conditions are met.

Under the relevant rules, the VAT (relating to unpaid receivables) can be recovered as from:

+ the date in which the purchaser is subject to one of the bankrupicy proceedings; or

+ the date of the decree approving the restructuring agreement referred to in Art, 182-bis of R.D, no. 267 of
142; or

» the date in which the recovery plans referred to in Art. 67 of R.D. no. 267 of 142 is published in the
Register of Enterprises.

The bankruptcy proceedings that are considered relevant in order to recover VAT are the following:

+ bankruptcy (so-called ‘fallimento’);
+ compulsory administrative liquidation (so-called ‘liquidazione coatta amministeativa’);

320 | Italy

--- Page 137 ---
+ adjustment of creditors’ claims (so-called ‘concordato fallimentare’);
+ arrangement before bankruptcy (so-called ‘concordato preventive”); and
+ bankruptcy in the course of the arrangement (so-called ‘fallimento nel corso del concordato preventivo’).

In presence of proceedings for insolvency, a receivable shall be considered as definitively unpaid in the

following cases:

«incase of garnishment, when the minutes drawn up by the bailiff states the lack of goods or credits to be
attached;

* in case of attachment on movable goods, when the minutes drawn up by the bailiff states the lack of
goods to be attached or the impossibility of access to the domicile or impossibility of finding; and

+ in case the auction for the sale of the foreclosed property has failed three times, it is decided to interrupt
the proceedings being too onerous.

When the above conditions occur, the credit note can be issued within the deadline for filing the Annual VAT
return relating to the year in which the condition occurred. The relating VAT can be deducted within the
deadline to file the annual VAT return relating to the year in which the credit note has been issued.

+ For example, if the judgment declaring the debtor’s bankruptcy is dated 10 March 2025, the supplier can
proceed as follows: the credit note is issued during 2025 and VAT can be deducted at the latest in the
annual VAT return to be filed for 2025 (i.e, within 30 April 2026, deadline for filing the VAT return);

+ the credit note is issued during the first four months of 2026 (i.e. within 30 April 2026, deadline for filing
the VAT return relating to 2025) and VAT can be deducted during 2026 or at the latest in the annual VAT
retum to be filed for 2026 (i.e, within 30 April 2027, deadline for filing the VAT return).

5.2 Cash discountsAssume that the supplier sends the following invoice:
Supply of goods EUR 1,000
22% VAT EUR_220
Total to be paid EUR 1,220

According to the conditions agreed between parties, if payment is received within the next month, a 5%
discount is applied.

‘The Italian law provides that the issuance of a credit invoice relevant for VAT purposes and the consequent
reduction of the taxable base represents an option of the supplier. In this example, if the condition agreed by
the parties is met (i.e. the payment is received within the next month), the supplier can reduce the taxable
base of the original supply by issuing a credit invoice (so-called ‘nota di credito’) of EUR 50 plus VAT.

5.3 Open Market Value

The open market value applies to the following:

+ exchanges of goods and services;

+ transactions between related parties if certain circumstances occur;

+ in the case of a separation of activities; and

+ putting company cars and mobile phones at the disposal of employees in case the consideration agreed is
Tower than the open market value under certain circumstances.

In case of supplies of goods by way of a discount or a premium, the open market value must be indicated in
the invoice.

54 Returnable packaging

Packaging and recipients for which the return is expressly provided for, are not included in the taxable
amount.

In any case, their amount must be separately reported in the invoice.

Italy | 321

--- Page 138 ---
Packaging for which there is only the possibility of return but not an obligation, as well as packaging that is
not returned within the agreed time limit, shall be subject to VAT.

6. VAT rates and exemptions

6.1 Standard rate
The standard VAT rate is 22%.

6.2 Reduced rate

The reduced VAT rate is 10% and applies to, among others:

+ supplies of certain food and non-alcoholic drinks;

* catering;

+ hotel accommodation;

+ supplies of pharmaceutical products for human or veterinary medicine;

+ supplies of gas and electricity for domestic use;

+ some oil products;

+ theatre and cinema products;

+ certain substantial repair work on real estate; and

> letting of residential real estate carried out by building and renovation firms.

6.3 Super-reduced rates

The super-reduced VAT rate is 4% and primarily relates to the supply of basic foodstuff, books and other
printed material and sales of new property under certain circumstances.

The reduced rate of 5% applies to educational and social and health services rendered by social co-operatives
and consortia thereof Lo certain categories and supply of some anti-Covid goods.

7. Exemptions

TA Exemption with the right to deduction

The VAT Law provides for 2 different types of exempt transactions: those giving the right to recover input,
VAT and those limiting the right of deduction.

The first type of transaction is related to the international traffic of goods and can be summarized as follows:
+ (direct, indirect or triangular) exports;

+ transport of passengers carried out partly in Italy and partly outside Italy;

+ transportation services relating to the export of goods;

+ hiring of transport means for the purposes of the above transportation services;

+ services carried out in airports and harbours;

+ supply, repair maintenance, chartering and hiring of certain seagoing vessels and aircraft;

+ supply of fuelling and provisioning to the same vessels and aircraft;

+ — supply of intermediary services relating to goods to be imported/exported or in transit; and

+ intra~Community supplies (direct or triangular transactions).

1 Intra-Community supplies

Regarding the proof of intra-Community transport, as of 2020 the rules provided for by Art. 45a of the EU
Regulation 282/2011 as implemented by the EU Regulation 2018/1912 of 4 December 2018, apply.

Additionally, the operation shall be VAT exempt under the conditions that the purchaser is included in the
VIES archive and the supply is correctly reported in the Intrastat form.

322 | Italy

--- Page 139 ---
According to the clarifications issued by the Italian Tax Authority the indications provided by the Ttalian Tax
Authority for proof of transport are still valid.

According to the Italian Tax Authorities, the following documentation needs to be maintained in order to

apply the VAT exemption in case of Ex Works (EXW) supplies:

+ the invoice issued to the EU customer registered for VAT purposes (in a EU Member State other than Italy);

+ the documentation concerning the agreements between the parties;

+ the Intrastat forms reporting the invoice;

+ the transport document (such as CMR) signed by the carrier and the recipient of the goods and statement
from the purchaser whereby the latter states that goods have been delivered; and

+ proof of payment.

With respect to Ex Works (EXW) supplies, the tax authorities have clarified that if the transport document is
missing (or it does not report the signature of the recipient), the proof of the transport can be provided by any
other document suitable for proving the transport of the goods to another EU Member State.

The combination of documents made available must provide clear evidence of the transportation of the goods
to another EU Member State.

An invoice needs to be issued in the case of an intra-Community transfer of own goods.

7.1.2 Export supplies

In order to apply the VAT exemption to exports, it is necessary to furnish proof of exportation. Said proof

must be furnished for the following cases:

+ direct exports by means of the third copy of the SAD or the invoice (or a transport document) endorsed by
the customs authorities where the goods leave the EU;

+ triangular exports (which is a peculiarity provided by the Italian VAT Law) by means of the thitd copy of
the SAD, endorsed by the Customs authorities where the goods leave the EU, for the Italian customer and
by means of the invoice issued by the Italian supplier endorsed by the Customs authorities for the first
Italian supplier; and

+ indirect exports (it means when the non-Italian resident customer is in charge of transporting the goods
from Italy to the NON-EU country of destination) by means of the invoice endorsed by the Customs
authorities where the goods leave the EU (since the SAD will be kept by the non-resident customer).

Furthermore, regarding the implementation of the Export Control System (ECS) in the EU, introduced by EU
Regulation no. 1875/2006, as of 1 July 2007, the proof of exportation is represented by an electronic message.
In particular, the proof of direct exportation is represented by the “confirmation of exit” message resulting
from the customs authorities’ website, to be checked by means of a Movement Reference Number (MRN).

In addition, the company must also keep in its files all the other documentation providing evidence of the exit

from the EU, such as:

+ the transport document signed by the recipient of the goods or a transport document with the evidence of
delivery to the destination issued by the legal representative of the carrier; and

+ proof of payment.

Other exempt transactions include supplies of goods and services to the diplomatic seats, to the Military
headquarters of an EU Member State or to the Italian Ministry of Defence in execution of a NATO program,
to the EU Commission or to the United Nations.

7.1.3 Warehousing

7.1.3.1 VAT warehouse
Subject to certain conditions, both national and EU goods can be stored in a VAT warehouse.

As long as they are stored in a VAT warehouse, goods cannot be sold to private persons, since the withdrawal
from a VAT warehouse may be performed exclusively by taxable persons.

Italy | 323

--- Page 140 ---
Apart from the above rule, and also on the basis of clarifications provided for by the Customs authorities, the

following goods are not allowed to be admitted for storage under a VAT warehousing arrangement:

+ non-BU goods (i.e., goods not put into free circulation within the EU);

+ temporarily imported goods;

* goods stored in temporary custody warehouses before receiving a Customs destination; and

+ compensating products obtained from equivalent goods to be exported from the EU before importation of
the import goods through advance export.

It is possible to place non-EU goods in a VAT warehouse, but only when the importer provides the Customs
authorities with a warranty for the amount of the import VAT. The warranty is released when the goods are re-
moved from the warehouse and the relating VAT, if applicable, is correctly accounted for by the releasing entity.

Until the adoption of the definitive procedure, Customs authorities have clarified that in order to release the

warranty, the following documentation must be filed with them:

+ a copy of the self-invoice or copy of the invoice (in case of export or intra-Community supply) integrated
with the references of the registration in the VAT ledgers. As an alternative to the integration, copy of the
VAT ledgers can be shown; and

+ a statement according to DPR no. 445/200, reporting the declaration of conformity of the copies to
the original as well as the registration in the VAT ledgers. A copy of an identity document of the legal
representative is also necessary.

The warranty is not required from:
+ authorized economic operators; and
+ taxable persons that are known to the Customs authorities to be solvent.

The status of solvency must be ascertained by the Customs authorities after checking the following

documentation to be filed with them:

* application to be exempted from the provision of the warranty;

+ historical certificate issued by the Chamber of Commerce, which indicated that the taxable person has
been registered at the Chamber of Commerce for (at least) 1 year;

+ certificate issued by the Italian Tax Authority indicating the lack of tax debts; and

+ statement according to DPR no. 445/2000 indicating the amount of the imports carried out during the last
12 months. The mentioned imports must not have been carried out irregularly and, therefore, must not
have been subject to penalties.

In case of a positive check, the authorization is valid for 1 year and for an amount equal to the VAT
corresponding to the imports carried out during the previous year, including the imports made during the
previous year through the VAT warehouse.

The VAT warehousing regime also applies in the case of services carried out in places close to the VAT
warehouse, including processing and handling transactions (that must not be longer than 60 days) carried
out on goods delivered to the VAT warehouse keeper. It is not required that the goods are unloaded from the
means of transport

Considering that the function of a VAT warehouse is the storage and custody of goods (although no minimum
storage period is established and no unloading from transport means is required), an ‘accounting’ storage is
not permitted.

As of 1 April 2017, all supplies of goods introduced into the VAT warehouse shall be possible without VAT
payment independently of the nature of the goods and of the ‘status’ (Italian, EU or non-EU) of the parties to
the transactions.

Additionally as of the date of 1 April 2017, the release of goods (goods imported as well as domestic supplies
of goods placed in the VAT warehouse) from a VAT warehouse which are to be used or supplied in the
territory of the Italian state can only be carried oul by VAT taxable persons and implies the payment of VAT
by this VAT taxable person who releases the goods.

324 | Italy

--- Page 141 ---
In case of extraction of goods previously imported and put into free circulation through introduction in the
VAT warehouse, VAT is still due by the VAT taxable person through the reverse charge mechanism but, in
principle, upon filing of a warranty (which is different than the one filed at the moment of the introduction
of the goods. See above explanation). The cases in which this warranty is due, the content of it and the
formalities are defined through the decree of the Minister of Economy and Finance dated 23 February 2017
and the following implementing measures of:

+ VAT taxable persons exempted from the warranty;

+ Cases of exclusion from the warranty; and

+ Compulsory Warranty.

VAT taxable persons are exempted from the warranty if the following conditions are met (‘solvency

conditions’):

+ filing of the annual VAT return during the 3 tax periods preceding the extraction of the goods;

+ VAT payments carried out (if die) arising from the latest 3 annual VAT returns filed at the moment of
extraction of goods;

+ lack of definitive notices of assessment - for which the payment has not been carried out — regarding
the issuance and use of invoices for non ~ existent transactions. The said notices must be notified in the
current tax period or in the 3 tax periods preceding the extraction of goods; and

+ lack of formal knowledge regarding the starting of criminal proceedings or imposition of criminal fines
for the specific criminal tax violations provided for by d.lgs. no. 74/2000.

The presence of the above conditions is stated through a specific form (approved by the Italian Tax Authority)
to be filled in by the taxable person extracting the goods and to be filed with the VAT warehouse keeper when
the first extraction is carried out; the statement is valid for one year. The warehouse keeper must file the form

with the Tax Authority.

Cases of exclusion:

The requirements of solvency as indicated above are deemed to exist if | of the following conditions are met:

+ the importer (who placed the goods into the VAT warehouse) and the VAT taxable person extracting the
goods from the VAT warehouse are the same; and

+ the VAT taxable person extracting the goods from the VAT warehouse is: (i) an authorized economic
operator; or (ii) a company that is known as solvent by the Custom authorities.

In the above cases, VAT is due by the VAT taxable person extracting the goods on the basis of the reverse
charge mechanism.

Compulsory warranty

If the ‘solvency conditions’ are not met, VAT is due through the reverse charge mechanism and a specific
warranty (the same one as is used for VAT refund purposes) must be filed, The amount to be guaranteed is
equal to the VAT and the warranty is effective for 6 months as from the date of extraction. A copy of the
warranty must be filed with the Tax Authority when the goods are extracted.

In case of extraction of goods previously introduced through a domestic supply in order to be used or supplied
in the territory of the Italian state, VAT is due by the taxable person extracting the goods and is paid, on his
behalf, by the warehouse keeper, jointly responsible with the taxable person extracting the goods.

The payment must be carried out through the F24 Form before the 16" of the month following the one in
which the extraction has been effected. ‘The VAT due cannot be offset against other credits.

7.1.3.2 Excise warehouse

VAT can be suspended for supplies of specific goods under excise duty suspension (gasoline or diesel fuel
intended for use as motor) carried out in the fiscal warehouse or the transfer of the said goods from a fiscal
warehouse to another fiscal warehouse or between a fiscal warehouse and the warehouse of a registered
consignee.

Italy | 325

--- Page 142 ---
Specific rules regarding the payment of the VAT for the said goods apply in relation to the release for
consumption from a fiscal warehouse or extraction from a registered consignee’s warehouse.

7.1.3.3 Bonded warehouse
Goods may be stored in a bonded warehouse in Italy.

If goods transported from a third country are directly placed under a bonded warehouse regime, customs
duties and VAT are not due. The supply of the said goods in the bonded warehouse is out of scope. However,
an invoice must be issued reporting that the amount is not subject to VAT. The said fulfilment must be carried
out by non-resident taxable persons too according to the clarifications issued by the tax authority.

When goods are released from a customs warehouse and placed into free circulation in Italy, import VAT must
be immediately paid to the Customs authorities,

In addition, it is possible to place the goods into VAT-free zones in Italy. The goods placed into a free zone
may be transformed, processed, eto, or stored in warchouses, without payment of VAT or customs duties.

7.2 Exemptions without the right to deduction

7.2.1 Exemptions in the public interest

Exemptions without the right of deduction are mainly provided for the following supplies (the list is not
exhaustive but covers the main supplies):

* postal services;

+ services supplied by hospitals, clinics and authorised health institutions;

+ ambulance services:

+ services supplied by orphanages, asylums, rest homes etc.;

+ social welfare and assistance to employees;

+ education if certain conditions are met;

+ supply of human organs, blood and human milk;

+ services supplied by libraries, museums, galleries etc; and

+ free supplies of certain assets to non-profit organisations if certain conditions are met.

7.2.2 Other exemptions

Other exemptions concern:

+ financial-insurance activities;

+ credit transactions and related services, including the granting of warranties and similar transactions;
+ management of investment funds;

+ activities relating to foreign exchange and transactions in foreign currencies;

* insurance and reinsurance activities;

+ transactions relating to shares, bonds and other securities not representing merchandise;

+ _ activities relating to authorized betting and lotteries; and

* intermediary services relating to transactions referred to above.

7.3. Option for taxation

The supplier can opt for the application of VAT with reference to the following exempt operations:

+ sale of residential real estate carried out by the building company (or the one that carried out the
renovation of the building) afler 5 years from the completion of the building/renovation provided that the
option for taxation is expressed by the supplier in the deed of transfer;

« _ sale of social housing provided that the option for taxation is expressed by the supplier in the deed of
transfer;

+ sale of instrumental buildings carried out by the building company (or the one that carried out the
renovation of the building) after 5 years from the completion of the building/renovation provided that the
option for taxation is expressed by the supplier in the deed of transfer;

+ sale of instrumental buildings where the supplier is not the building company (or the one that carried out

326 | Italy

--- Page 143 ---
the renovation of the building) provided that the option for taxation is expressed by the supplier in the
deed of transfer;

+ _ renting of residential real estate if the lessor is the building company (or the one that carried out the
renovation of the building) provided that the option for taxation is expressed by the lessor in the rental
agreement;

+ renting of instrumental buildings provided that the option for taxation is expressed by the lessor in the
rental agreement; and

+ sale of investment gold and relating intermediation services in case the option for taxation is expressed
in the annual VAT return, The option can be expressed by entities producing, transforming and trading
in investment gold per single supply or for all the operations but, in the latter case, it applies for at least
three years. The option can be exercised only for supplies to taxable persons and the VAT is due by the
latter through the reverse charge mechanism.

8. _ Liability

8.1 Reverse charges

Several reverse charge rules are provided for by the VAT Law.

In Italy there are several obligatory reverse charge rules besides the reverse charge for general B2B services
provided by non-resident suppliers to taxable persons and legal entities with an Italian VAT ID number
established in Italy.

8.1.1 General reverse charge mechanism — non-resident suppliers (Article 194 EU VAT Directive)
A general reverse charge rule applies on any supply of goods or services taxable in Italy when it is made by
a non-established person to a taxable person or a non-taxable legal entity resident or established in Italy. The
reverse charge rule also applies when the non-established supplier is registered for VAT purposes in Italy for
having appointed a VAT representative or directly registered.

The reverse charge rule does not apply when the customer is a non-resident company. This means when both
the supplier and the customer are non-Italian established operators, the standard rule applies and VAT is due
by the supplier.

Areference must be made on the invoice to the application of the reverse charge as follows: “VAT due by the
recipient under Article 17, Paragraph 2 of the DPR 633/72”. A non-resident supplier does not have to report
the invoices subject to the general reverse charge rule on the VAT return, even if the supplier is registered for
VAT purposes in Italy.

According to the tax authorities, in case of purchases from EU established suppliers, also those with a VAT
registration number in Italy, the invoice must be issued under the VAT registration number of the country of
establishment of the EU supplier.

8.1.2 Reverse charge mechanism — specific domestic rules (Article 199 EU VAT Directive)

Domestic reverse charge rules apply to the following supplies and/or services:

+ supply of investment gold and non-investment gold in case of option to apply VAT;

* _ services relating to the construction of immovable property (as per the ATECO classification) supplied
by subcontractors to the main contractor or to other subcontractors (but not to services supplied by the
contractor to the principal);

+ supply of an immovable property with an option for taxation expressed by the supplier in the deed of
transfer;

* the provision of cleaning services, of demolition, plant installation and completion services relating to
buildings;

+ supply of mobile phones and components of computers (valid until 31 December 2026);

+ supply of video games consoles, tablets pc, and laptops (valid until 31 December 2026);

+ supply of scrap, waste and scrap of ferrous metals and articles thereof, waste paper, rags and scrap of

ltaly | 327

--- Page 144 ---
bones, hides and skins, glass, rubber and plastics, as well as wooden pallets recovered from the cycles

of use subsequent to the first one, including those relating to the aforesaid goods that have been cleaned,
sorted, cut, compacted, ingot moulded or subjected to other treatments to favilitate their use, transport and
storage without changing their nature;

+ supply of natural gas (through any natural gas system situated within the territory of the EU Community
or any network connected to such system), electricity, and heating or cooling energy (through heating and
cooling networks) to “taxable dealers” (valid until 31 December 2026);

+ transfer of allowances to emit greenhouse gases (valid until 31 December 2026);

* transfer of other units that may be used by operators to comply with Directive 2003/87/EC and the
transfer of certificates relating to gas and electricity (valid until 31 December 2026);

+ services rendered in the consortium, in particular services rendered to the consortium by enterprises
which are members of the consortium, being the latter contractor with a public body to be invoiced
according to the split - payment rules. The said reverse charge shall be applicable in case of positive
authorization from the European Union; and

+ supply of services carried out through work contracts, subcontracting, entrusting to consortium entities
or negotiated relationships however denominated characterized by the prevalent use of labor at the
customer’s places of business with the use of instrumental goods owned by the customer or traceable to
the customer in any form, rendered to companies engaged in the business of transport and handling of
goods and provision of logistics services. The effectiveness of the new rules is subject to the authorization
from the European Union. Until the European Union authorizes the rule, as from | January 2025 the
supplier and the customer may opt for the VAT payment to be made by the customer in the name and on
behalf of the supplier (who remains jointly and severally liable for the VAT due),

A supplier must issue an invoice with a reference to the applicable reverse charge law provision.

8.2 Joint and several liability

Italian law provides for joint and several liability for VAT grouping and Italian VAT group settlement as above
indicated.

Also in case of fiscal representation, the representative is

intly and severally liable with the non-resident.

9. Recovery of input VAT

91 Non-recoverable input VAT

Input VAT incurred on certain goods and services is not recoverable (even when the purchase is made for
business purposes) unless the taxable person carries out a business activity relating to the items listed below:
+ business gifts:

+ input VAT incurred when purchasing gifts is, in principle, not deductible unless their purchase cost is
lower than EUR 50;

+ entertainment expenses:

+ VAT incurred on entertainment expenses, other than business gifts is, in principle, recoverable only
when these expenses are also eligible for deduction for corporate tax purposes (i.e., when the above
expenses are deemed to have an advertising character);

+ mobile phones:

+ VAT on the purchase, importation, hire or lease of mobile phones, and related management charges,
may be recovered if the purchase is carried out in the ordinary course of business and to the extent of
their use for this purpose. However, tax authorities may check the business purpose in the case of a
deduction higher than 50%;

+ costs relating to cars (including fuel):

+ only 40% of the input VAT incurred on the purchase, financial leasing, hire, and similar activities
of cars may be recovered. The same limit applies to input VAT on maintenance, repair services and
fael. Input VAT on tracks and vans is always recoverable if they are used in the ordinary course of
business;

328 | Italy

--- Page 145 ---
+ costs relating to aircraft and leisure yachts

+ input VAT incurred on the purchase, hire or leasing of aircraft and leisure yachts as well as on the
purchase of fuel and maintenance or repair services is not recoverable unless the use/purchase of these
goods is the purpose of the business, e.g. the VAT person carries out a transport or leasing business:

+ residential dwellings:

+ input VAT incurred on the purchase, maintenance or repair of residential dwellings is recoverable only
by taxable persons whose exclusive or main business activity is the resale, building and leasing of
such properties; and

+ VAT on the transportation of persons.

9.2 Excess input VAT

Excess input VAT is recoverable and refunded by the VAT authorities in specific circumstances, In particular,
the VAT Law provides for annual and quarterly claims.

Annual claims

For VAT-registered persons, recoverable input VAT exceeding VAT on supplies can either be carried
forward to the next period or refunded, provided that the amount exceeds EUR 2,582 and 1 of the following
conditions is met:

* discontinuation of the activity;

+ the average output VAT rate is lower than the average input VAT rate: in order to apply this condition,
the average rate on purchases and imports must exceed the average rate on supplies, increased by 10%.
Purchases (and or imports) and sales of depreciable assets are excluded from the computation;

* exempt transactions with credit: in order to apply this condition, the amount of exempt transactions with
credit (i.e, exports and intra-EU supplies) must be more than 25% of the overall amount of transactions
carried out in the tax year;

+ up to the amount of input VAT incurred on the purchases and imports of depreciable goods and of goods
and services purchased for R&D purposes;

* when the taxpayer carries out, for the most part, transactions not subject to VAT because of territoriality
rules;

+ non-resident taxable persons (cither directly registered for VAT or with a VAT representative); and

*  inany case, the refund claim can be submitted for an amount equal to the lower VAT credit of the last 3
years.

‘The annual VAT refund claim is included in the annual return to be filed each year from 1 February up to the
deadline for filing the VAT return, i.e. 30 April of the year following the relevant one.

The refund up to the amount of EUR 2,000,000 (on an yearly basis) is known as a refund through the ‘fiscal
account’, and the taxable person’s bank account must be credited by the tax collector with the amount of
VAT credit claimed within 60 days from the date on which the refund request is filed. If this deadline is not
respected, interest accrues start from the 60" day following the date of the request.

In case of a refund up to the amount of EUR 30,000, no warranty is due. For a refund exceeding EUR 30,000,
alternatively (with the exclusions reported below), it is possible:

+ to file a warranty (ie, bank or insurance guarantee); or

* to file the VAT return or the request for a refund with a certification from specific professionals (so called
‘endorsement of conformity’ or ‘visto di conformité’ in Italian) or with the signature of the body in charge
of the accounting audit,

Regarding the second option, it is also necessary to file a statement (which must be attached to the annual/

quarterly refund form) whereby the following must be stated:

+ — the net equity has not decreased — compared to the accounting results of the latest tax period — more than 40%;

+ the amount of real estate has not decreased — compared to the accounting results of the latest tax period —
more than 46% for sales not made in the normal course of the activity carried out;

Italy | 329

--- Page 146 ---
+ the activity has not ceased or been reduced as a result of the transfer (total or partial) of going concerns
included in the accounting results;

+ incase of a claim filed from companies (in Italian ‘socicta di capitali’) not listed on regulated markets, the
shares of the claimant have not been sold for amounts exceeding 50% of the share capital during the year
preceding the request for a refund; and

+ the payment of social security and insurance contributions has been carried out.

‘The warranty is mandatory (i.e. no certification is possible) when the claim is filed by:

+ taxable persons carrying on a business for less than 2 years (other than the start-up innovative businesses);

+ taxable persons to whom, in the 2 years preceding the request for refund, a notice of assessment has been
issued.

From the said notice of assessment, it must result, for each year, a difference between the amounts assessed
and VAT due or the credit declared higher than:
- 10% of the amounts declared if they do not exceed EUR 150,000;
- 5% of the amounts declared if they exceed EUR 150,000 but less than EUR 1,500,000;
- 1% of the amounts declared with a minimum of EUR 150,000 if EUR 1,500,000 is exceeded;
+ taxable persons lacking certification (or signature from an audit body) or without a statement as specified
in art. 47 DPR 28 December 2000, n. 445; and
+ taxable persons requiring the refund of the VAT credit as a result of the act of cessation of the activity.

‘The warranty is to be filed by a bank or an insurance company. Please note that the amount to be guaranteed
is equal to the VAT amount claimed for refund plus interest. The interest amount to be guaranteed is
calculated:

+ for a period of 3 years after the date of payment of the VAT refund; or

«until the expiration deadline of the statute of limitations, if this period is shorter than 3 years.

For any amount exceeding EUR 2,000,000, the VAT credit refund must be claimed with the competent office
of the tax authorities “Agenzia delle Entratc’ by filing the so called ‘ordinary procedure”

In this case, according to the rules currently in force, the refund should be granted no later than 90 days
starting from the date of the request being filed by the taxable person. Interest accrues starting from the 90"
day following the date the request is filed. The same conditions (guarantee or certification), as described
above for a refund through the fiscal account, are required in this case.

Quarterly claims

Quarterly VAT credit refund claims can be filed by electronic means for the first 3 quarters of the year:
+ by 30 April for the first quarter;

+ by 31 July for the second quarter; and

+ by 31 October for the third quarter.

But this may only be done if at least 1 of the following conditions is satisfied:

+ average rate: the average output VAT rate is lower than the average input VAT rate; the average rate on
purchases and imports exceeds the average rate on supplies, increased by 10%; purchases (and or imports)
and sales of depreciable assets are excluded from the computation;

= exempt transactions with credit must be more than 25% of the overall amount of transactions carried out
in the tax year;

+ incase of purchases and imports of depreciable goods, the refund can be claimed only if the mentioned
purchases and imports of depreciable goods exceed 2/3 of the total taxable amount of purchases and
imports carried out in the quarter,

+ claimant is a non-resident taxable person (either directly registered for VAT or registered with a VAT
representative); or

+ the taxable person carries out, for the most part, transactions not subject to VAT due to territoriality rules.

330 | Italy

--- Page 147 ---
In particular, in order to file the claim, the following two conditions regarding the transactions must be met:

+ the taxable person renders to subjects established outside the territory of Italy for an amount higher than
50% of the total amount of all the transactions, work on movable goods, transport services of goods
and ancillary services and related intermediary services or insurance and financial services to subjects
established outside the EU referred to goods to be exported outside the EU; and

* the refund must be claimed from the tax authorities ‘Agenzia delle Entrate’, who will make the payment
within 20 days from the end of the second month following the relevant quarter. Should said deadline not
be respected, interest accrued from the 30" day following the due date of the taxable person.

The same rules (guarantee or certification) as described above in case of a refund through the fiscal account,
are also required in case of a quarterly refund.

9.3 Capital goods — adjustment periods

+ immovable property - 10 years
+ movable property - 5 years

Italian law does not provide for an adjustment period for services other than certain services relating to
depreciable assets, for which either the 5 or the 10 year adjustment period applies.

94 VAT refunds for foreigners

EU and non-EU taxable persons may apply for the refund of Italian VAT through the EU VAT Refund Portal

on purchases and imports of movable goods and/or services provided that:

+ they do not have a fixed establishment in Italy;

+ they do not supply goods and services in Italy apart from zero rated international transport of goods and
ancillary services or supply of goods and services taxable in Italy for which the option for OSS or JOSS
has been exercised; and

+ the supply of goods and services is to a person who is liable for payment of VAT through the reverse
charge mechanism,

In order to be refundable, the VAT must be deductible according to the relevant rules (see 9.1 for information
on the non-recoverability of VAT)

9.4.1 VAT refunds to EU taxable persons

The VAT refund application must be filed:
+ _ by electronic means with the EU Member State in which the taxable person is established;
+ with respect to a period of not less than 3 months and for an amount of not less than EUR 400,

Should the amount relating to | or more quarters be less than EUR 400, the refund may be claimed with
reference made to the calendar year, provided that the amount of VAT is not less than EUR 50. The reference
period can be less than 3 months where it represents the remainder of a calendar year. The reference period
cannot be more than | year,

The deadlines to file the application are the following:

+ ifthe reference period is a quarter, it should be filed as of the first day of the month following the
reference period up to 30 September of the calendar year following the reference period; and

+ ifthe reference period is a calendar year, it should be filed from 1 January up to 30 September of the year
following the reference period.

‘The application is considered to be filed on the date on which the file, as forwarded by the EU Member
State where the applicant is established, is fully received by the competent Italian Tax Authority (i.e., Centro
Operativo di Pescara).

Invoices should be attached.

Italy | 331

--- Page 148 ---
The Italian tax authorities will notify the applicant, by electronic means, also through the EU Member State
of establishment, of the date on which it received the application.

Notification of the decision to approve or refuse the refund application will be made by the Italian Tax
Authority (j.e,, Centro Operativo di Pescara) within 4 months from its receipt.

The bank account will be credited within 10 working days from the date of notice that the application has
been approved.

The refund is made to an Italian bank account or, upon request of the applicant, to a bank account in another
EU Member State. In the latter case, the amount paid is net of transfer expenses.

Should the Italian Tax Authority need further information in order to check the application, this information
will be requested of the applicant or of its EU Member State through electronic means within 4 months from
the receipt of the application. The requested information must be provided within 1 month from the date

on which the request has been received. In this case, the decision to approve or refuse the refund will be
communicated within 2 months from the receipt of the information or, if there is no reply, within 2 months
from the expiry of the term.

Additional information may be requested by the Italian Tax Authority, If that is the case, the information
should be provided within 1 month from the date on which the request has been received. In this case,
notification of the decision to approve or refuse the refund should be made within 8 months of receipt of the
refund application.

Interest accrues at 2% per year as of the deadline to carry out the payment (ie., 10 working days from the
date of notice that the application has been approved). Should further or additional information be requested,
interest accrues from the due date to submit the additional information,

Interest does not accrue if the applicant does not submit the information requested. Interest will also not apply
so long as requested further documents are not received.

With respect to the content of the refund application, the list of requirements is available on the website:
https:/itinyurl.com/uabus8ct

In any case, it should be noted that the description of the goods and services should be indicated by using the
codes and sub-codes set by EU Regulation 30 November 2009, n. 1174,

Itis possible to correct the application already filed by filing a new one (without adding new invoices or
import documents) before the normal deadline (i.¢., 30 September of the following year).

Finally, the Italian Tax Authority should be informed in case of adjustment of the deductible proportion within
the following calendar year.
The decision to refuse the refund can be appealed within 60 days as of the date of receipt of the decision.

9.4.2 VAT refunds to non-EU taxable persons

The refund of VAT to non-EU subjects is allowed, provided that the ‘condition of reciprocity’ with the other
State is met.

Currently, Switzerland, Norway, Israel and the UK are the only non-EU countries for which this condition is
satisfied.

In case of option for OSS or IOSS regimes, the refund is allowed also in the lack of the ‘condition of
reciprocity’ and in presence of operations carried out in Italy for which the said regimes apply.

332 | Italy

--- Page 149 ---
The deadline to file the application is 30 September of the following year and the competent Italian Tax
Authority (i.e., Centro Operativo di Pescara) will carry out the refund within 6 months from the receipt of the
application or within 8 months should further information be requested,

The refund can be requested with respect to a quarter or a year.

The form to be used is the “Modello IVA 79” that should be sent by courier to the Italian Tax Authority (i.e.
Centro Operativo di Pescara).

(htips:/tinyurl.com/394srfid)

The following documents must be enclosed with the above-mentioned form:

+ original invoices;

+ proof of payment; and

+ declaration from the tax authorities of the State of establishment that the claimant is a taxable person.

Interest accrues at 2% per year as of the deadline to carry out the refund (j.¢., 6 months from the receipt of the
application or 8 months should further information be requested).

Interest will not accrue if the applicant does not submit the information requested. Interest will also not apply
until requested further documents in support of the refund application are received.

10. Administrative obligations

10.1 Invoicing

10.1.1 Invoice content

An invoice must indicate:

+ the date of issuance;

+ anumber with a specific and unambiguous reference:

+ the VAT identification number of the supplier;

+ the VAT identification number of the customer and, if the customer is established in another EU Member
State, the VAT identification number issued by the EU Member State of establishment; in case the
customer is not acting as a taxable person, the tax code; in case of intra-community supplies, the VAT
identification number (included in the VIES archive) must be mentioned in the invoice;

+ the name and address of both the supplier and the customer, and the data of the VAT representative of the
supplier or of the customer, if any;

+ adescription of the goods and services: quality, nature and quantity;

+ the applicable VAT rate;

+ the amount of the VAT due and of the taxable basis, rounded to the eurocent, which must be split per
applicable rate;

+ the date on which the supply of goods or the provision of services is carried out, or the date in which the
consideration is paid in whole or in part, where this date is different from the invoice date;

+ an indication that the invoice is issued by the customer or by a third party, if this is the case (see below).

For the following transactions it is necessary to report whichever circumstance is applicable:

+ supply of goods in transit or subject to special Customs regime (such as Customs warehouse regime):
“operazione non soggetta” (i.e., transaction not subject to VAT);

+ VAT-exempt transactions that give the right to recover input VAT on purchases according to Article 8,
8-bis, 9 and 38-quarter of DPR 633/72: “operazione non imponibile” (i.e. transaction not taxable);

+ VAT-exempt transactions that limit the right of deduction according to Article 10 (except for betting and
gambling transactions) of DPR 633/72: “operazione esente” (i.e exempt transaction);
+ transactions subject to a special margin scheme as provided for by Decree no. 41/1995: “regime del

margine — beni usati” (margin scheme — used goods);

Italy | 333

--- Page 150 ---
+ “regime del margine-oggetti d’arte” (margin scheme — work of art); or

+ “regime del margine — oggetti di antiquariato o da collezione” (margin scheme ~ antique or collection
objects);

+ transactions carried out by travel agencies subject to margin scheme as provided for by Article 74-ter
of DPR 633/72: “regime del margine ~ agenzic di viaggio” (margin scheme ~ travel agencies).

For all the above transactions, it is possible to make a reference cither to the domestic provision or to the EU
Directive provision.

For the following transactions carried out with taxable persons not established in Italy, the applicable one of

these texts is reported:

+ supply of goods or services by suppliers established in Italy to VAT taxable persons liable for payment of
the tax in another EU Member State: “inversione contabile”; (i.¢. reverse charge)

+ supply of goods and services by suppliers established in Italy deemed to be carried out outside the EU:
“operazione non soggetta” (i.c. transaction not subject to); and

+ purchases of goods and services from non-EU suppliers: “autofatturazione” (i.e. self-billing)

10.1.2 Time limits

The invoice must be issued within 12 days as from the date in which the operation is deemed to be carried
out. VAT is due regarding the month in which the chargeable event takes place.

For supplies of goods whose delivery is proven by a transport document, a single invoice can be issued for
all supplies taking place by the 15" of the month following the month of delivery, provided it mentions all
relevant transport documents.

‘The above rule is also applicable to the supply of services, as specified in suitable documentation, rendered
to the same customer during the same month. The invoice (reporting the details of the transactions) must be
issued by the 15" of the month following the month in which the transaction is deemed lo be carried out.

10.1.3 Currency
The taxable amount can be expressed in any currency while the VAT must be expressed in Euros.

10.1.4 Conversion and exchange rate

In case of a consideration and/or expenses in a foreign currency, the exchange rate of the day the transaction
is carried out for VAT purposes must be used or, in the absence of a relevant indication on the invoice, the
exchange rate of the date of issuance of the invoice. Lacking an exchange rate on this day, the exchange rate
should be that of the nearest day. It is possible to adopt the exchange rate published by the European Central
Bank for all the transactions carried out during the calendar year.

10.1.5 Self-billing

Under Italian VAT legislation, self-billing is allowed and, according to the tax authorities, authorization by the
supplier is necessary. In addition, the procedure (o be followed must be agreed upon by the two patties.

In order to allow the issuance of invoices by persons from non-EU countries if no mutual assistance

agreement exists with these countries, the following is required:

+ aprevious communication must be filed with the tax authorities; and

+ the activity of the Italian supplier must have started at least 5 years prior and no VAT violations must have
been made in the past 5 years.

10.1.6 Simplified invoice

A simplified invoice can be issued in cases where the amount of the invoice is not higher than EUR 100. The
said amount can be increased by up to EUR 400 by a specific decree. Furthermore, on the basis of a specific
decree, the simplified invoice can be applied without a threshold to specific sectors or specific taxable persons.

The simplified invoice must indicate:
+ the date of issuance;
+ anumber with a specific and unambiguous reference;

334 | Italy

--- Page 151 ---
» the VAT identification number of the supplier:

+ the name and address of the supplier and the data of the VAT representative of the supplier, if any;

* the name and address of the customer and the data of the VAT representative of the customer, if any; as an
alternative, it is possible to report exclusively;

* the tax code or the VAT registration number if the customer is established in Italy; or

* the VAT registration number issued by the EU Member State of establishment if the customer is
established in another EU Member State;

+ adescription of the goods and services;

+ the total amount due and the resultant VAT amount or the data necessary for its calculation; and

+ — for the invoices issued according to Article 26 of DPR 633/72, the reference to the changed invoice and
an indication of the changes made.

The simplified invoice cannot be issued for the following transactions:

+ intra-Community supply of goods; and

+ transactions as provided for by Article 21 (6bis) (a) of DPR 633/72 (supply of goods and services to a
taxable person liable to pay the tax in another EU Member State or supply of goods and services to be
deemed as carried out outside the EU).

10.1.7 Storage of invoices

Invoices must be kept available until 31 December of the 4" year following the year in which the annual
return is filed. If the annual return is not filed, the invoices must be kept until 31 December of the 5" year
following the year in which the annual return should haye been filed.

Invoices must be kept available until 31 December of the 5® year following the year in which the annual
return is filed. If the annual return is not filed, the invoices must be kept until 31 December of the 7" year
following the year in which the annual return should have been filed

However, according to the Italian Civil Code, invoices as well as other relevant business documents must be
kept available for 10 years.

Electronic invoices must be stored in electronic form.
Similarly, paper invoices may be saved on electronic storage systems.

Invoices, ledgers and other documents provided for by DPR 633/72 may be saved electronically in another
EU Member State with which a mutual assistance agreement exists.

For control purposes, the taxable person guarantees online access to the data concerned and guarantees that all
the documents therein saved (including the ones granting the authenticity and integrity of electronic invoices)
can be printed and saved in a storage medium

10.1.8 Electronic invoicing

Electronic invoicing is mandatory for B2B and B2C operations carried out between subjects resident or
established in Italy.

Non-resident subjects, although they are registered for VAT purposes in Italy for having appointed a VAT
representative or directly registered subjects, are excluded from the electronic invoicing.

The above excluded subjects can opt for electronic invoicing,
Regarding the operations with non-resident subjects, taxable persons established in Italy could opt to issue
electronic invoices to the non-resident subjects in order to avoid the fulfilment sub 10.2.4. In case of issuance

of a electronic invoice, the non-resident must receive a copy of the electronic invoice issued.

‘The paper copy must report exactly and exclusively the data reported in the electronic invoice and it is
necessary to state that the paper invoice is a certified copy of the original electronic invoice.

Italy | 335

--- Page 152 ---
Electronic invoices must be issued in a specific xml format (eXtensive Markup Language) and sent to the
Exchange System (SDI) by the taxable person directly or through designated intermediaries.

SDI is an electronic system managed by the Italian Tax Authority, through which electronic invoices are
received, delivered to the recipient and, in presence of certain conditions, electronic invoices are stored
electronically according to the law.

In order to receive the electronic invoice, the taxable person can use a Certified Electronic Mail or a recipient
code,

10.2. VAT compliance

10.2.1 VAT return period
Each VAT taxable person (foreign or local) is required to fill in and file electronically an annual VAT return

‘The reporting period of the return is the calendar year.

10.2.2 Filing of VAT return and payment

Annual VAT return

Taxable persons (foreign and local) should electronically file the annual VAT return for the previous calendar
year between 1 February and 30 April.

The annual VAT return must be drafted on the official form approved, each year, by the tax authorities
“Agenzia delle Entrate’ and made available on their website (/ttp://www.agenziaentrate.gov.it) at the
beginning of the year of filing,

Payments
On a monthly basis, output VAT on supplies carried out in the previous month must be offset against input
VAT allowed for deduction relating to purchase invoices booked in the same period,

The monthly VAT computation (so called ‘VAT settlement’ or ‘Liquidazione IVA’ in Italian language), and
payment of the VAT due, must be made by the 16" day of the month following the month being reported.

If the turnover of the previous tax period does not exceed EUR 500,000 for services or EUR 800,000 for
other activities (stich as supplies of goods), the taxable person may opt for quarterly payments to be made by
the following deadlines:

First quarter 16 May

Second quarter 20 August (deadline postponed from the normal 16 August due to the holiday season)
Third quarter 16 November

Fourth quarter/

yearly balance 16 March

In this case, the amount due for the quarterly computation must be increased with 1% interest. Taxable
persons are not required to report the monthly VAT computation on the Sales Ledger, but since the tax
authorities can request how the amount of VAT was computed, evidence should be retained.

‘The VAT Law provides for an annual VAT advance payment. When the VAT balance of the Jast relevant

period (month of December or Fourth Quarter) of the previous calendar year (referred to in this paragraph as

“year X-1”) shows a VAT liability, the following amount must be paid in advance:

+ 88% of the VAT liability due for the same period (December or Fourth Quarter) of the previous calendar
year (year X-1) (historic method); or

+ 88% of the VAT, if any, due for the current period (year X) (forecast method): or

+ 100% of the VAT, if any, due for the last relevant period (year X) on the basis of the VAT transactions that
have taken place up to 20 December (effective method; i.e,, | December - 20 December),

336 | Italy

--- Page 153 ---
No advance payment is due when:

+ the last relevant period of the previous calendar year (X-1) has not shown a VAT debt; or

+ the last relevant period of the current calendar year (X) will not show a VAT debt. The advance payment
is due by 27 December of each year.

10.2.3. European sales listing

The European sales listing has been merged with the Intrastat obligations (only one form to be filed,
containing both the relevant data for the European sales listings and the Intrastat data). In order to simplify the
completion of the monthly Intrastat forms (see also Paragraph 10.4), completion of the columns “statistical
value”, “delivery term” and “mode of transport” are not required if the intra~Community dispatches and
acquisitions do not exceed EUR 20,000,000 per calendar year.

10.2.4 National recapitulative statement

Cross-border operations must be communicated using the same form as for the electronic invoice through the
Interchange System (Sd1).

The Italian law provides for the communication of the VAT computations.

Each taxable person must communicate electronically the data of the periodical VAT computation on a
quarterly basis within the end of the second month following the quarter (i.e. for Q2, the deadline is 16
September).

‘The deadlines are as follows:

+ QI 31May;

+ Q2_ 16 September;

+ Q3 30 November

+ Q4 end of February of the following year.

The communication must be filed even when there is a VAT credit shown by the periodical VAT computation.

‘The quarterly communication of the periodical VAT computations must be filed by electronic means to the
Italian authorities in the form of an XML file prepared according to the technical specifications published on
the website of the Italian administration.

10.2.5 Tax assessment period

The tax assessment period is the S" year following the year in which the annual return has been filed. If the
annual return over 2021 is filed in April 2022, the VAT due over 2021 can be assessed until 31 December
2027. If the annual return is not filed, the invoices must be kept until 31 December of the 7" year following
the year in which the annual return should have been filed.

10.3 Penalties

Administrative penalties have been reviewed by the Legislative Decree no. 87 of 2024 and the new penalties
will apply to violations committed as from 1 September 2024.

‘Asa consequence of the application of the new rules as from | September 2024, penalties applicable in case
of violations committed before and after | September 2024 are indicated.

10.3.1 Default penalties for late registration

The tax authorities can apply a penalty ranging from EUR 500 to EUR 2,000 (no change as from 1 September 2024),
10.3.2 Default penalties for not filing a VAT return or a European sales listing on time

If the VAT return is not filed on time and no VAT is due, the penalty ranges from EUR 250 to BUR 2,000 (no
change as from | September 2024).

If the annual return is filed within 90 days of the deadline, it is possible to regularise the late filing by paying
a reduced penalty equal to 10% of EUR 250 (no change as from | September 2024).

Italy | 337

--- Page 154 ---
In case of failure to submit the annual return or submission of the return more than 90 days after the deadline,
if VAT is due, the penalty ranges from 120 to 240% of the total VAT owed with a minimum of EUR 250.

Tf the said violation is committed as from I September 2024, in case of failure to submit the annual return or
submission of the return more than 90 days after the deadline, if VAT is due, the penalty is equal to the 120%
of the total VAT owed with a minimum of EUR 250.

In case the omitted annual VAT return is filed within the deadline for filing the annual VAT return of the
following tax period but before any audit from the Tax Authority of which the taxpayer bas been formally
informed, the penalty ranges from 60% to 120% of the VAT with a minimum amount of EUR 200.

In case the said violation is committed after 1 September 2024 and the omitted annual VAT return is filed
within the expiration deadline of the statute of limitations (but before any audit from the Tax Authority of
which the taxpayer has been formally informed), the penalty is equal to 75% of the VAT due. In case no VAT
is due, the penalty is equal to EUR 250.

In case of omission, late or incorrect filing of the Intrastat, a penalty from EUR 500 to EUR 1,000 for each
omitted (or incorrect) Intrastat is applicable. The penalty is reduced by 50% if the Intrastat is filed within
30 days of the request of the Tax Authorities (no change as from | September 2024).

10.3.3 Default penalties for not paying VAT on time to the tax authorities

If VAT is not paid on time or a lower amount than the amount due is paid, a penalty of 30% of the unpaid

amount is applied. In case of payment within 15 days afler the deadline, a pro-rata (1/15) penalty reduction

for each day until the 15" day applies. In case the payment is carried out within 90 days after the deadline,

the penalty is reduced to 15%. However, it is possible to regularize the omitted payment by paying a reduced

penalty, The determination of the reduced penalty is made according to the following schedule:

* 1/10 of 30% if the payment is made within 30 days as from the deadline;

+ 1/9 of 30% if the payment is made within 90 days as from the deadline;

+ 1/8 of 30% if the payment is made after 90 days past the deadline but within the deadlinc for the filing of
the VAT return relating to the year in which the violation has been committed;

+ 1/7 of 30% if the payment is made within the deadline for the filing of the VAT return relating to the year
following the one in which the violation has been committed;

+ 1/6 of 30% if the payment is made after the deadline for the filing of the VAT return relating to the year
following the one in which the violation has been committed; and

+ 1/5 of 30% if payment is made atter the report drawn up by the Tax Authority further to the audit carried out.

The rectification implies that the reduced penalty and the unpaid VAT, including interest on delayed payment
are paid within the deadline provided for the rectification.

‘The interest for late payment of the VAT due is 2% per year as of 1 January 2025.

‘The rectification is no longer possible once a notice of assessment or a communication of irregular payments
has been received.

In case of omitted or late payment carried out as from | September 2024, a penalty of 25% of the unpaid
amount is applied. In case of payment within 15 days after the deadline, a pro-rata (1/15) penalty reduction
for each day until the 15" day applies. In case the payment is carried out within 90 days after the deadline, the
penalty is reduced to 12,5%. However, it is possible to regularize the omitted payment by paying a reduced
penalty and interest.

As a consequence of the review of the regularization regime too, the determination of the reduced penalty is

made according to the following schedule:

+ 1/10 of 25% if the payment is made within 30 days as from the deadline;

+ 1/9 of 25% if the payment is made within 90 days as from the deadline;

+ 1/8 of 25% if the payment is made after 90 days past the deadline but within the deadline for the filing of
the VAT return relating to the year in which the violation has been committed:

338 | Italy

--- Page 155 ---
+ 1/7 of 25% if the payment is made after the deadline for the filing of the VAT return relating to the year in
which the violation has been committed;

+ 1/6 of 25% if the payment is carried out after the communication of the “scheme of assessment act” not
preceded by the tax audit report and without tax settlement proposal having been filed;

+ 1/5 of 25% if the payment is carried out after the tax audit report without filing of accession to the tax
audit report and, in any event, before the communication of the “scheme of assessment act”;

+ 1/4 of 25% if the payment is carried out after the communication of the “scheme of assessment act”
relating to the violation resulting from the tax audit report without tax settlement proposal having been
filed.

10.3.4 Default penalties on VAT assessments when VAT is not reported correctly

Tn case the VAT return indicates an amount of VAT less than the one due, or the VAT return indicates that
the deductible or refundable amounts are higher than those claimable (e.g., this may be the case if VAT is
incorrectly deducted or the VAT is related to specific taxable transactions which have not been declared
and previously not documented and/or not registered, etc.), the penalty ranges from 90% to 180% of the
difference.

It is possible to rectify the incorrect return by filing an additional VAT retum and paying a reduced penalty as

follows:

+ 1/9 of the minimum (90%) if the payment is made within 90 days as from the deadline to carry out the
fulfilment;

+ V/8 of the minimum (90%) if the payment is made after 90 days past the deadline but within the deadline
for the filing of the VAT return relating to the year in which the violation has been committed;

* 1/7 of the minimum (90%) if the payment is made within the deadline for the filing of the VAT return.
relating to the year following the one in which the violation has been committed;

+ 1/6 of the minimum (90%) if the payment is made after the deadline for the filing of the VAT return
relating to the year following the one in which the violation has been committed; and

+ 1/5 of the minimum if payment is made after the tax audit report is drawn up by the Tax Authority after a
tax audit is carried out. The reduction is not applicable in case of specific violations such as the omitted
issuance of tax receipts or transport documents.

Regarding VAT returns filed as from 1 September 2024, the penalty is equal to the 70% of the difference with
a minimum amount of EUR 150.

It is possible to rectify the incorrect return by filing an additional VAT return and paying a reduced penalty.
The reductions mentioned in the previous paragraph (from 1/9 to 1/4 ) apply to the mentioned 70% penalty.

The penalty is equal to 50% if the violation arises from an integrative VAT return filed within the expiration
deadline of the statute of limitations but before any audit from the Tax Authority of which the taxpayer has
been formally performed.

A rectification is not possible once a notice of assessment has been received.

10.3.5 Offense penalties

Omitted payment

‘The failure to pay the VAT due in the VAT return, constitutes a criminal offence subject to imprisonment
from 6 months up to two years if the unpaid amount is more than € 250,000 per tax period and the payment
is not carried out before 31 December of the year following the one in which the annual VAT return has been

filed (therefore, for example, for 2023 omitted VAT payment, the penal violation applies if the payment is not
carried out before 31 December 2025).

The offence penalty does not apply in case the tax debt is being paid by instalments further to the receipt of a
communication issued by the Tax Authority (so called avviso bonario).

Italy | 339

--- Page 156 ---
In the event of forfeiture of instalments, the offence penalty applies if the residual debt is higher than EUR 75,000.

‘The offence is not punishable if the act depends on causes beyond the signatory’s control that occurred after
the collection of VAT. The court takes into account the non-transitory liquidity crisis of the signatory due to
the non-recoverability of debts due lo ascertained insolvency or over-indebtedness of third parties or to the
non-payment of certain and collectable debts by public authorities and the non-possibility of appropriate
actions to overcome the crisis.

The above offence penalty is the result of the changes introduced by the Legislative Decree no. 87 of 2024
and it applies also to violations pending as from the date of entry into force of the decree (i.e. 29 June 2024).

‘The offence shall not be punishable if, before the declaration of the opening of the trial at first instance, the
tax debts, including administrative fines and interest, have been extinguished by full payment of the amounts
due, also following the special conciliatory procedures and adherence to the assessment provided for by the
tax laws, as well as the regularization.

‘rau it VAT return through the fF invoices or other documents for non-existent tt tio1

The filing of a VAT return - where fictitious taxable passive elements are reported using invoices or other
documents for non-existent transactions in order to evade value added tax - constitutes a criminal offence
subject to from four years up to eight years imprisonment.

In case the amount of fictitious taxable passive elements is lower than EUR 100,000, the imprisonment is
from one and a half year to six years.

Fraudulent VAT return by me: f other artif

The filing of a VAT return - where positive items for an amount lower than the actual amount or fictitious
taxable passive elements are indicated by carrying out objectively or subjectively fake transactions or by
using fake documents or other fraudulent means capable of hindering the assessment and misleading the tax
authorities in order to evade value added tax - constitutes a criminal offence subject to three years up to eight
years imprisonment.

The above offence penalty applies should the below conditions jointly occur:

- the evaded tax is higher than EUR 30,000; and

- the amount of undeclared positive items, also by indicating fictitious passive elements, is higher than 5%
of the total amount of positive items declared or higher than EUR 1,500,000.

infai AY n

The filing of a VAT return - where declared supplies or non-existent passive elements are lower than the
actual ones, with the aim of evading tax — constitutes a criminal offence subject to two to four and a half years
imprisonment should the below conditions jointly occur:

- the evaded tax is higher than EUR 100,000,00; and

- the amount of supplies not declared also by indicating non-existent passive elements, is more than 10% of
the total amount of the positive items indicated in the return, or, in any case, is higher than EUR 2,000,000.

Omitted VAT return

The omitted filing of the VAT return in order to evade VAT, constitutes a criminal offence subject to two to
five years imprisonment provided that the evaded VAT is higher than EUR 50,000.

10.4 Intrastat

Separate Intrastat forms must be filed for intra-Community supplies and acquisitions of goods and services.

340 | Ttaly

--- Page 157 ---
10.4.1 Intrastat threshold

The Intrastat form regarding intra-Community acquisitions of goods and services must be filed on a monthly

basis:

+ regarding services, by taxable persons having carried out a total amount of transactions exceeding Euros
100,000 in at least one of the 4 preceding quarters; or

+ — regarding goods, by taxable persons having carried out a total amount of transactions exceeding Euros
350,000 in at least one of the 4 preceding quarters.

The Intrastat form regarding intra-Community supplies of goods and services must be filed monthly or

quarterly according to the amount of the intra-Community transactions realized during the preceding 4

quarters, In particular, Intrastat declarations (either for goods or for services) must be filed with the following

frequency:

+ ona quarterly basis by taxable persons having carried out, in the 4 preceding quarters and for each kind
(supply of goods or services), a total amount of transactions not exceeding EUR 50,000 per quarter; and

+ onamonthly basis, by taxable persons who have exceeded the above threshold.

The filing of the data for statistical purposes is compulsory in the event that the taxable persons have realised,
in the four quarters preceding the reference quarter, a quarterly total amount of intra-Community supplies of
goods or services exceeding EUR 100,000.

In the case of activity which lasted less than 4 quarters, the Intrastat must be filed quarterly provided that the
first condition mentioned above is fulfilled.

Should the threshold be exceeded during a quarter, the Intrastat must be filed monthly as of the month
following the month in which the threshold has been exceeded.

In the above case, the Intrastat forms relating to the previous months, duly marked, must be filed.

Intrastat must be filed exclusively by electronic means within 25 days following the end of the reporting
period,

The call-off stock operations are communicated too.

10.4.2 Intrastat data to be reported

The information which must be reported for both the arrival and the dispatch statistics is:
+ VAT number supplier/purchaser;

+ EU Member State of origin/destination;

+ code of the province of origin/destination;
* — supplementary unit in some cases;

+ nature of the transaction;

+ delivery term;

+ mode of transport;

+ $-digit commodity code of the goods;

+ invoice value of the goods in EUR;

+ net weight of the goods; and

+ statistical value.

Italy | 341

--- Page 158 ---
10.5 Additional compliance requirements

‘There are no additional requirements.

Information received from:
Anna Maria Maccallini

RPLT RP Legalitax
annamaria.maccallini@rplt.it www.rplt.it

342 1 Italy

--- Page 159 ---
Latvia

The European Union (EU) VAT Directive is implemented through the “Value Added Tax Law’ (hereafter
referred to as the “Latvian VAT Law” or “VAT Law”). In Latvia, the VAT is referred to as “Pievienotas
vértibas nodoklis” or “PVN”.

As of | January 2013, a completely new VAT Law came into force. The new VAT Law was implemented
to make the VAT provisions more compliant with the EU VAT Directive, by following the structure and
terminology of the EU VAT Directive.

Latvian value added tax law in force: https://tinyurl.com/3347irev (in Latvian) h¢tps://tinyurl.com/Sewvvdny
(in English version all amendments not included though).

1. Taxable Persons

According to the Latvian VAT Law, any person who independently carries out any economic activity in any
place, whatever the purpose or result of that activity, is considered a taxable person. Taxable persons can be
either registered or not registered with the tax authorities.

LL Registration threshold & SME Scheme for domestic taxable persons

If the total value of taxable supplies of goods and services provided by domestic taxable person has not
exceeded EUR 50,000 during the preceding 12 months, no registration is required. Taxable persons can,
however, register before reaching this threshold.

The registration is with the Latvian State Revenue Service (SRS). The following documents must be provided
for the registration:

+ aregistration form (the registration form can be downloaded on https://tinyurl.com/3eutnsmn),

+ ifan individual is registering, a copy of his/her passport or some other official identification; and

+ _ if'an authorized person performs the registration, a power of attorney.

12 Registration threshold & SME Scheme for foreign taxable persons

Generally there is no registration threshold for foreign legal entities unless the SME Scheme is applied. The
threshold for application of the SME scheme is EUR 50,000. The foreign taxable person’s total turnover in
the EU must not exceed EUR 100,000.

When registering, the following documents must be submitted:

*  aregistration form;

* the extract from the Commercial Register; and

+ if the authorized person performs the registration, a power of attomey.

The registration form can be submitted via the Electronic Declaration System (EDS), or sent via email by
using a secure electronic signature to vid@vid.gov.lv.

The registration forms can be downloaded at: hitps.//tinyurl.com/w7kn2a2x

According to the law the VAT registration should be done in 5 working days after the submission of all the
required documents to register for VAT. In practice, however, the actual registration time is extended due to
additional questions from the tax authorities in ascertaining the objectivity of planned activities. Thus, lately
the procedure usually takes two to three weeks, depending on how fast additional questions can be addressed
and additionally requested documents provided (if at all).

In some circumstances registration can be avoided, because of the application of the reverse charge
mechanism or the appointment of a fiscal representative.

Latvia | 343

--- Page 160 ---
13 VAT Grouping

The conditions for the registration of a Latvian VAT group are: the participants of the VAT group may only
be taxable persons, the maximum number of participants in Lhe VAT group is not limited and a taxable person
may not be a participant of another VAT group at the same time.

A VAT group may be established if the total value of the taxable supplies of goods and services provided by
at least one participant of the VAT group during the preceding 12 calendar months up to the month when the
application for the registration of the VAT group is submitted, is at least EUR 350,000.

‘The participants of the VAT group can only be companies registered for VAT purposes in Latvia. Also, they
must be included in one group of companies (in accordance with the Group of Companies Law) or a branch
ofa foreign merchant (legal person), provided that the foreign merchant, in accordance with the Group of
Companies Law, is a member of the same group of companies in which the other participants of the VAT
group are included.

Holding companies receiving only dividend income cannot be included in the VAT group. Foreign companies
cannot be included in the VAT group, even if they have a fixed establishment in Latvia, However, if the
foreign company registers a branch in Latvia, this branch could be inchuded in the VAT group provided that
the above conditions stipulated in the Group of Companies Law are met,

‘The VAT group members must enter into an agreement. This agreement must be entered by all the members
with one of them being appointed as the principal entity, the hcad company of the VAT group.

VAT grouping is optional. A VAT group is regarded as one taxable person for any supply to or by the VAT
group. For VAT purposes, supplies of goods or services between members of a VAT group do not fall within
the scope of VAT. Supplies of goods or services made by third parties to an individual member of a VAT
group are deemed to have been made to the VAT group. A taxable person can withdraw from the VAT Group
not earlier than 12 calendar months after it joined the VAT group, unless other conditions for the VAT group
are no longer met.

The VAT group members use their own VAT registration number for transactions with taxable persons which
are not members of the group. The registration number granted to the VAT group shall be used only for filing
the VAT return of the VAT group and for the payment of the VAT. Group members are jointly and severally
liable for payment of the group's VAT.

14 Fiscal Representative

Latvia has introduced the concept of fiscal representation, A fiscal representative is a taxable person who,
based on a wrilten agreement, is liable for paying VAT to the tax authorities and represents a taxable person
from another EU Member State or a non-EU country for tax purposes in the following transactions:

+ when importing goods followed by an intra-Community supply;

+ when importing goods followed by a domestic supply;

* on receipt of goods domestically, if the goods have been received for the purpose of exporting them
further and placed in a customs warehouse or a tax warehouse, and in the course of the subsequent
exportation of those goods;

+ when purchasing goods in the territory of the European Union, if these goods have been purchased for the
purpose of exporting them further and placed in a customs warehouse or tax warehouse, and in the course
of subsequent exportation of those goods; and

+ when goods are purchased in the territory of the European Union, where they are actually received
domestically for the purpose of supplying them to another Member State.

Both non-EU persons and EU taxable persons may - but are not obliged - to appoint a fiscal representative
when registering for VAT.

The requirements for a fiscal representative are that he:
+ should file one of the following:
* abank certification that he has deposited enough funds to cover the potential tax debts - at least 20%

344 | Latvia

--- Page 161 ---
of the average VAT taxable transactions value reported in the VAT returns of the previous 3 taxation
period tax declarations and no less than EUR 14,200; or
+ a bank or insurance company guarantee of at least EUR 285,000;
+ should be registered as a taxable person in Latvia for a time period of at least 2 years and have performed
business activities in Latvia uninterrupted since his VAT registration;
+ does not have any outstanding tax debts when submitting the VAT registration application or does, by
decision of the SRS, have an arrangement to divide the term for the payment of tax debts into instalments;
+ does not have a criminal record for fraud, falsification of documents, tax avoidance or criminal activities
that could result in a reduction of the taxable amount;
* files the tax returns and the information requested by the SRS in due terms;
+ is registered as the user of the EDS; and
+ can be contacted at its legal address.

2. Taxable transactions

21 Transfer of business

The transfer of business is not considered a supply of goods or services if the following criteria are met:

+ the transferee takes over the rights and liabilities of the transferor of the business; and

+ the transferee continues the operations of the business and these operations are not connected to the
liquidation of the business or sale of the received assets.

The general rules for transfer of business are provided by the Latvian Commercial Law. It should be note
that according to the Latvian Commercial Law, the transferor and transferee are jointly liable for the liabilities
incurred prior to the transfer of the business for 5 years.

It should also be noted that the parties have to notify the Latvian tax authorities within 30 days as of the
transfer of business in order to avoid input VAT correction for the transferor.

2.2 Supplies free of charge

Under Article 7 of the Latvian VAT Law, the provision of samples for business purposes or certain low value
gifts are not taxed while the supplier retains his right of deduction.

Under Latvian VAT Law a low value gift refers to goods or services which are given without consideration
and the value of which without the tax does not exceed EUR 15 during a calendar year per one person.
However, goods or services related to advertising or representation expenses are excluded.

2.3 Importation

2.3.1. Importation followed by an intra~Community supply
It is possible to apply an exemption on the importation of goods into Latvia if it is followed by an intra-
Community supply within 30 days.

Conditions have to be met in order to apply the exemption, for example, that the name of the taxable person
in the EU to which the goods will subsequently be delivered, and its VAT registration number be shown on
the delivery/import documents,

Postponed accounting on importation

is a special importation regime for the import of goods in Latvia providing for import VAT to be
deferred to the VAT return. In order to apply the special importation regime for imported goods, a taxable
person must submit an application to the tax authorities, With this licence, importers avoid payment of VAT
at the time of importation, Instead, the importer will have to pay the VAT due in its Latvian VAT return. If the
importer is entitled to deduct VAT, the VAT paid can be reclaimed in the same VAT return.

Latvia | 345

--- Page 162 ---
The licence to apply the VAT deferment regime for imported goods will be issued to a taxable person if:

«he is registered with the Latvian Commercial Register or registered with the SRS as a performer of
business activities;

+ he has carried out economic activities domestically for at least previous 12 months and has been
registered as Latvian VAT payer;

+ he has sufficient technical and financial resources (o perform the particular type of economic activity;

+ he does not have tax debts on the day of submission of the application for the licence;

+ during previous 12 months provided tax and informative declarations and financial statements within
the time periods specified in the laws, as well as provided additional information within the time periods
specified by the SRS, which is necessary for determining the amount of tax to be paid to the State budget
or overpayment of tax;

+ persons that have representation rights have no criminal record of fraud, falsification of documents,
avoidance of taxes and the payment of taxes compared thereto or other criminal offences which may
affect the determination of the amount of taxes;

+ the representative of the VAT payer (if the VAT payer is a legal person) or the VAT payer himself (if the
VAT payer is an individual) is not regarded a person of risk (determined in accordance with the Law On
Taxes and Fee);

+ it is registered as a user of EDS system of the SRS.

Special importation regime is also applicable to the importation of fixed assets no licence is required then.

‘The licence is not issued to companies not established in Latvia.

SL Place of supply

3.1 Consignment and call-off stock

There was a simplification in regard of call-off stock introduced in Latvia. Also, as of 2020 new rules in
regard of call-off stock were introduced, in line with the EU VAT Directive.

The transfer of goods by a VAT registered taxable person from one EU Member State to Latvia to create

a stock of goods from which their customer can ‘call-off” (use and pay for) the goods as and when they
require them, can be described as call-off stock. If certain conditions are met, the supplier does not perform a
transfer of own goods followed by a local supply, but an intracommunity supply to his customer. Latvian VAT
legislation is in line with the articles newly introduced in the EU VAT Directive. The tax authorilies generally
agree with the content of the Explanatory Notes with regard to the 2020 Quick Fixes.

3.2 Installation supplies

Installation supplies are treated as supplied where they are constructed or installed. In Latvia, there is no
formal definition of the term “supply with installation or assembly”. In determining whether the services are
related to immovable property or installation services are provided, the authorities examine the works actually
performed.

The reverse charge applies if a non-established company that is not registered for VAT in Latvia supplies
goods with installation in Latvia and the customer is VAT registered in Latvia.

If the goods are supplied to a company or individual that is not VAT registered in Latvia, the supplier must
register as a taxable person in Latvia.

33 Distance sales

On or after 1 July 2021, registration may be simplified for distances sellers from within the EU, and for
distance sellers of low-value goods from outside the EU, under the EU-wide “One Stop Shop” (OSS) regime.
As such, the rules and thresholds for distance sales (both intra-Community distance sales and distance sales
of imported goods) have been harmonized across the EU with no leeway for Member States. The distance
selling threshold for sales to customers in other EU Member States without a VAT registration number

346 | Latvia

--- Page 163 ---
(e.g, private individuals) is now EUR 10,000 for intra-Commmunity distance sales. Turnover generated from
the supply of ‘electronically supplied services’, telecommunication services and broadcasting services are
included in the EUR 10,000 threshold. A threshold of EUR 150 per consignment applies for the application of
the special scheme for distance sales of imported goods.

If OSS regime is not chosen, a foreign taxable person must register for VAT in Latvia:

+ within 30 days from the day when the total value of the sales in the previous or current calendar year has
exceeded the threshold; or

+ before the transaction, if the goods are subject to excise duties in Latvia, irrespective to the value of
excise goods.

A foreign taxable person opting to register must file an application, The option is binding, implying that
Latvian VAT must be applied starting from the date the person is registered for Latvian VAT. No special
requirements apply.

3.4 Simplified triangulation

Under Latvian VAT legislation, the simplified triangulation rufes have been implemented in line with the EU
VAT Directive Article 141

‘Taxable persons A, B and C in the ABC transaction must be registered for VAT in different EU countries (i.e. in
Member States 1, 2 and 3). The transport must be organized by either party A or party B. If party B arranged the
transport, B must have provided A with a valid VAT ID number of another country than the country of dispatch

and arrival. The goods must be transported directly from A in Country 1 to C in Country 3.

If Latvia is the country of arrival, the triangulation simplification cannot be applied if B is VAT registered in
Latvia. In such situation B should report an intra-Community acquisition of goods followed by a domestic
supply subject to Latvian VAT.

Latvian VAT law does not provide for limitations to apply the triangulation simplification if party B happens
to be VAT registered in the country of dispatch.

3.5 Acquisition threshold

‘The acquisition threshold for non-taxable legal persons, taxable persons engaged in exempt activities and flat-
rate farmers from suppliers established in another EU Member State is EUR 10,000.

3.6 Effective Use & Enjoyment

Use and enjoyment provisions have been implemented in the VAT Law.
The general use and enjoyment rule as per the Latvian legislation provides that:

+ Art. 59a(a): where the supply of relevant services would otherwise be regarded as made in Latvia, but
the effective use and enjoyment of those services is outside the Community, the supply is deemed to be
outside of the Community; and

+ Art, 59a(b): where the supply of relevant services would otherwise be regarded as made outside the
Community, but the effective use and enjoyment of the services is in Latvia, the place of supply is
deemed to be Latvia.

The special provisions for effective use and enjoyment as per (a) and (b) above, apply to:
+ short-term hiring of means of transport, B2B and B2C;

+ hiring of movable goods, other than means of transport, B2B and B2C; and

+ transport of goods services, other than intra~Community transport of goods, B2B.

Latvia | 347

--- Page 164 ---
4. Chargeable event & Chargeability of VAT

41 Principles

In the case of a supply of goods or services, the VAT becomes, in principle, chargeable at the time the goods
or services are supplied and the VAT invoice is issued. [f an invoice is issued or payment is received before
the goods or services are supplied, VAT becomes chargeable on the date of issuing the invoice. Invoices shall
be issued no later than 15 days after the chargeable event occurred.

The VAT on the purchase of a service, which falls under the main rules of Articles 44 and 196 of the EU VAT
Directive, is nevertheless due at the time the service is supplied.

42 Advance payments

Where a payment is to be made on account before the goods or services are supplied, VAT becomes
chargeable on receipt of the payment.

4.3 Continuous supplies

Generally, the time of supply and the date at which VAT is chargeable for a supply of goods, is the date the
goods are supplied or transportation begins, but not later than the date the buyer receives them. In the case
ofa continuous supply of goods and/or services over a long period (excluding hire purchase) resulting in
periodic tax invoices or payments for deliveries, the transaction is deemed to have taken place at the end of
the period covered by the invoices or payments, but at least every six months.

Where the supply of goods within the territory of the EU takes place permanently over a continuous time
period and exceeds one calendar month, it shall be deemed that the transaction has occurred in the end of each
calendar month until the time when the supply of goods is completely finished.

4.4 Cash accounting

Upon request, the tax authorities may permit a taxable person to opt to apply a cash accounting scheme for

the payment of the VAT, if:

+ the total turnover in the previous calendar year did not exceed EUR 100,000; or

+ when registering for VAT purposes, the amount of planned transactions is less than EUR 100,000 in the
taxation year.

The cash accounting can still be used by the following VAT taxable persons:
+ a registered taxable person whose total transaction value in the previous tax year has reached
EUR 100,000 but has not exceeded EUR 500,000 and who is:
+ a registered taxpayer who operates in the fisheries sector - in relation to supplies of fresh, frozen or
refrigerated fish and crustaceans; or
* a producer of agricultural products or a cooperative society of agricultural services - in relation to the
supply of such agricultural products: (a) live animals, (b) milk and dairy products, (c) bird eggs, (d)
natural honey, (e) vegetables, root plants, tuberous plants, (f) cereal products, (g) oilseeds and fruit,
miscellaneous grains, seeds and fruit.
+ a registered taxable person whose total transaction value in the previous tax year has reached
EUR 100,000 but has not exceeded EUR 2,000,000 and who provides residential house management
services, in relation to the provision of residential house management services.

The total amount of transaction value shall not include the value of fixed assets and intangible investments
supplied by the taxpayer, if the taxpayer performs such supply once within a period of 12 months.

Where the scheme applies, output VAT is chargeable when the payment is received, and input VAT is
deductible when the payment is made. If cash accounting is used, the remark ‘cash accounting” should be
indicated on the invoice.

348 | Latvia

--- Page 165 ---
5. Taxable amount

5.1 Bad Debt Relief

A taxpayer can reduce its VAT liability for bad debt VAT, provided that certain criteria are met:

+ the goods or services supplied are invoiced;

+ the debt has been incurred within the last three tax years;

+ the transaction has been subject to VAT and is shown on the tax return for the tax period concerned;

+ the amount of the debt has been written off from the specific provision for bad debts or directly to losses
(expense) in the accounts of the taxable person in the current tax period or in a previous tax period;

+ the recipient of the goods or services is not a related person within the meaning of the Law on Taxes and
Duties;

+ the supply of goods or services to the relevant recipient has been interrupted for at least three months and
has not been resumed; and

+ the registered taxable person has not transferred (assigned) his right of claim to another person.

The supplier must establish that he or she took measures to recover the lost debt, and must notify the recipient
that the debt in question is considered as lost. The claim can be done in any (monthly) VAT return.

For bad debts of exceeding EUR 1,000 (excluding VAT), in addition to meeting the conditions described
above, the taxpayer must also obtain a court decision for collection of the debt and a statement from a court
bailiff that collection is not possible.

5.2 Cash Discounts

Assume that the supplier sends the following invoice

“Supply of goods EUR 1000

21% VAT EUR 210

Total to be paid — EUR 1210

If payment is received by us within the next 14 days,y ou can subtract 2% of the invoice as a cash discount.”

Payment is indeed received within 14 days.

If the invoice states the transaction and VAT amount with the discount, namely, the amounts taking into
account the 2% cash discount, no separate credit invoice is necessary.

If however, the amounts are not shown on the invoice, the supplier must send a credit invoice for the 2%
discount. Thus the overpaid VAT can be recovered and input VAT adjusted accordingly.

5.3 Open Market Value

The supply of goods or provision of services between related parties must be set at the market value if the

transaction value is:

+ less than market value and the recipient is not entitled to deduct imput VAT in full;

+ less than the market value and the supplier does not have the right to deduct input VAT in full and the
supply of goods or services is exempt; or

+ more than market value and the supplier is not entitled to deduct input VAT in full.

“Market value” is, generally, the price that would have to be paid to an unrelated buyer in circumstances of

fair competition. Where no comparable price for goods or services can be ascertained, market value shall

mean:

* in respect of goods — an amount which is not less than the purchase price of the relevant goods or of
similar goods or, in the absence of a purchase price, the cost price, determined at the time of supply; or

* in respect of services — an amount that is not less than the full cost of providing the service.

Latvia | 349

--- Page 166 ---
54 Returnable Packaging

If the deposit fee may be reimbursed to the buyer, the Latvian VAT Law provides businesses not to include
the cost of returnable packaging in the taxable amount of the total supply, In cases where the packaging is
pot returned, supplier must pay back the VAT at book value of the unreturned packaging when submitting the
annual VAT return

6. VAT rates

6.1 Standard rate

The standard rate in Latvia is 21%,

6.2 Reduced rate

The Latvian VAT Law provides for a First Reduced Rate of 12% and a Second Reduced Rate of 5%, subject
to certain conditions and requirements. The First Reduced Rate applies to certain essential supplies such as
registered medications and baby food. The Second Reduced Rate generally applies to printed and electronic
literature and publications.

First Reduced Rate of 12% applies to:

+ registered medicinal products, registered medical devices and parts;

+ specialised food and products for infants;

* domestic passenger and baggage transport;

* tourist accommodation;

+ timber products used for domestic heating:

+ other types of heating energy used for domestic purposes; and

+ fresh fruit, berries and vegetables, including washed, pecled, peeled cut and prepacked but not cooked or
otherwise (e.g, frozen, salted, dried) — the list of fruits and vegetables subject to the First Reduced Rate of
12% is included in the legal acts and will be applicable until 31 December 2024.

Second Reduced Rate of 5% applies to:
* education literature and original literature ~ both physical and digital;

+ colouring books, sheet music, maps and other such printed and digital works; and
+ newspapers, magazines and other periodicals, including annexes to such works.

6.3 Super-reduced and zero rates

Latvia has not introduced a 0% VAT rate on supplies of goods or services other than the zero rates mentioned
below in Chapter 7.

7. Exemptions

7.1 Exemptions with the right of deduction

7.1.1 Intracommunity supplies

In order for an intra-Community supply to qualify for the zero rate, the following two conditions must be met:

+ the customer to whom the supply is made must provide his or her VAT identification number to the
supplier; and

+ the transportation of the goods from Latvia to the other Member State must be confirmed by the relevant
transportation documents.

In addition, the supplier must comply with the obligation to submit a duly completed EC Sales list. In the case
of transfers of own stock, an internal invoice is required for reporting purposes. In Latvia it is an obligation to
report each supply or acquisition as per invoice number and date.

350 I Latvia

--- Page 167 ---
7.1.2 Export supplies
Exports of goods are generally zero-rated for VAT purposes.

This enables the supplier to recover input VAT on exports or dispatches of goods or services with a place of
supply outside Latvia.

The supply of goods from Latvia to a taxable person in another Member State is also generally zero-rated.

However, when goods are supplied to a consumer in another Member State (i.e., a person not registered for
VAT), Latvian VAT is generally applied in the same way as if the supply was made to a Latvian customer,
subject to the distance selling rules discussed in paragraph 3.3.

7.1.3. Warehousing

7.1.3.1 VAT warehouse
There is no concept of VAT warehouses introduced in the Latvian VAT law.

7.1.3.2 Excise warehouse
An excise warehouse permits the storage and handling of goods subject to excise duties. As of 2022 it
is possible in Latvia to store goods in a joint customs and excise warehouse. For more information see
paragraph 7.1.3.3. below.

7.1.3.3 Bonded warehouse

It is possible to put the goods into a bonded warehouse regime if the goods are not yet imported into Latvia or
if the goods will be further exported or are intended for cargo consolidation (e.g. when the goods are stored
while the ship, railways or other vehicle is being loaded fully before actual export out of EU).

Supplies of goods performed in customs warehouses are subject to 0% VAT if the goods are:
«received from non-EU countries and not released for free circulation inland; or
«received from other EU countries and for which the export procedure is started in other EU countries.

The parties responsible for payment of the goods are:

+ the holder of the customs warehouse;

+ the owner of the goods; and

+ the party providing guarantee for the tax authorities,

In case of tax debt, the authorities would approach all of these parties. Generally, the order of approaching
them depends on the type of customs warehouse and the agreements between the owner of the goods and the
warehouse,

7.2 Exemptions without the right to deduction

‘The following supplies are exempt without the right of deduction:

* insurance and re-insurance services;

+ financial services:

+ _ sale of real estate, except unused real estate and building land — option to tax applies if the supplier and
customer are both taxable persons;

+ rent of premises to private individuals;

+ investment funds’ management;

+ gambling and lotteries;

* — services between the members of cost-sharing associations;

+ medical services supplied to a patient (a list of the exempt services is defined);

+ services related to medical services (transportation of the patient with specialized vehicles,
accommodation and catering in medical institutions during treatment, diagnostic services occurring in
other medical institutions);

* postal services;

+ supply of human organs, milk and blood;

* dental services and services of dental technicians;

Latvia | 351

--- Page 168 ---
+ social services;

+ educational services supplied by state approved educational institutions and kindergartens;

+ fees for children staying in children’s camps organised in accordance with the requirements of the laws
and regulations governing education;

+ supplies of goods and services by public benefit organizations (special registration is required) for the
purpose of defending children’s and young persons” rights;

+ participation fees for sports competitions and practices organised by non-profit associations and
foundations;

+ cultural services supplied by theatres and circuses, museums, libraries, also concerts, events for children;
and

+ supply of gold and cash to the Bank of Latvia.

Input VAT deduction is allowed for insurance and financial services provided to customers outside the EU.

7.3 Option for taxation

Latvia provides for the possibility to opt to tax the supply of used immovable property if the seller and buyer are
both Latvian VAT registered persons and the seller has registered the property with the SRS prior to the sale. It
is possible to opt for all types of immovable property(including residential property) as long as it’s “used”.

In Latvia, there is no possibility to opt to tax financial services.

8 Liability

81 Reverse charges

In Latvia there are reverse charge rules for general B2B services provided by foreign entities to taxable
persons and legal entities with a Latvian VAT 1D number. This reverse charge applies in all EU Member
States and follows from Articles 44 and 196 EU VAT Directive. There is also (he reverse charge for the supply
of natural gas and clectricity supplied by non-resident suppliers to “taxable dealers” in Latvia registered for
VAT purposes in Latvia (Article 195 EU VAT Directive).

8.1.1 General reverse charge — non-resident suppliers (Article 194 Directive)
Art, 194 of the EU VAT Directive is not introduced in Latvia in relation to the domestic supply of goods,

As regards the supplies of services, the Latvian VAT law provides, that the recipient of the services who is

a VAT taxable person must reverse charge the VAT for the following services received from a non-resident

supplier:

- services related to immovable property (defined in Art. 47 of the EU VAT Directive);

- cultural, artistic, sporting, scientific, educational, entertainment and similar services (defined in Art. 53 of
the EU VAT Directive).

At the same time, the VAT law also provides for an obligation for the foreign service providers to register for
VAT in Latvia if they supply services related to immovable property and cultural etc. kind of services. The
foreign supplier supplying these types of services, should VAT register in Latvia prior to commencing the
supply of these services.

8.1.2 Specific domestic reverse charges (Article 199 Directive)

Latvia applies the reverse charge on the following domestic supplies between VAT taxable persons:

+ construction services;

+ certain supplies of scrap metal and related services;

+ supplies of mobile phones, tablet PCs, laptop computers, electrical components and game consoles. The
domestic reverse charge does not apply to electronic accessories, e.g., batteries, connection cables and.
charges, if they are sold separately;

+ supplies of certain types of timber, including wood intended for use as fuel;

+ certain supplies of cereals and industrial crops (including oilseeds);

352 | Latvia

--- Page 169 ---
+ certain supplies of unwrought precious metals, precious metal alloys and their semifinished products, and
metal coated with precious metal; and
+ certain supplies of semi-finished products of ferrous and nonferrous metals,

Only non-cash money settlements are possible in order to apply local reverse charge to the supplies
mentioned.

8.2 Joint and several liability

Under Latvian law, the management of a company is not jointly and severally liable for the unpaid taxes
of the businesses they manage in default. However, tax authorities can request unpaid taxes from the
management of the company, if all of the criteria are fulfilled:

+ the amount of arrears exceeds the total of 50 minimum monthly salaries in the Republic of Latvia;

+ the decision on the recovery of arrears has been notified to the legal entity;

+ it has been established that after the decision to conduct a tax audit (audit) has been taken or after the
initiation of a tax audit (control), as well as after the arrears have been created, the legal entity has
alienated the assets it owns and as a result of the actions or inactions of a member of the Management
Board, the arrears of the legal entity have not been paid in full within the time limits established by the
law;

+ a deed of impossibility of recovery has been drawn up; and

+ the legal person has failed to comply with the obligation under the Insolvency Law to file for insolvency
proceedings.

Joint and several liability exists for businesses that form part of a VAT group for the VAT debts of each
member of the VAT group for the entire period that the relevant entity was part of that VAT group.

A fiscal representative is responsible for the tax liability arising out of documents and tax returns they submit
and the taxpayer and/or the bailiff is responsible if property is sold at auction and monies due to the State are
not paid.

Other express abuse provisions or chain transaction provisions are not expressly addressed in the law. As a
general rule, a counter-party of a third party cannot be held liable for a principal’s VAT obligations, e.g., in
“carousel fraud.” missing taxpayer transactions.

9. Recovery of input VAT

OL Non-recoverable input VAT

Some input tax is specifically irrecoverable, for example:

+ VAT paid on goods or services acquired for non-business use;

+ 60% of the input tax from representation expenses (e.g., business meals, public functions, receptions and
generally occasions that involve or include customers, clients, etc.);

+ VAT paid on the purchase, lease and import of a luxury car with a value of more than EUR 75,000
(excluding VAT);

+ VAT paid for fuel and running costs for luxury passenger cars for the first 60 months as of purchase.
However, deductions are not denied if the car or truck is used for certain qualifying purposes, e.g.,
transportation, vehicle hiring, emergency vehicle services or a car sale or hire purchase business;

+ 50% of the VAT paid on passenger cars (except for businesses which primarily use cars. e.g., taxi services,
car rentals and emergency vehicle services) and related maintenance services and costs, including fuel;
and

+ VAT paid on items relating to a business’s sales of goods or services that are exempt from VAT.

9.2 Excess input VAT

When input VAT exceeds output VAT, overpayment VAT is reflected in the VAT return. Overpaid VAT is
evaluated on a monthly basis and refunded into the taxpayer’s bank account within 30 days of the submission
of the VAT return to the SRS.

Latvia | 353

--- Page 170 ---
‘A taxpayer can make corrections to submitted VAT returns up to 3 years after the date when the tax was due
0 as to obtain a refund, provided an audit has not begun or curried out in connection with the relevant period.

9.3. Adjustment periods

The Latvian VAT Law provides the following adjustment periods:
+ Immovable property - 10 years;
+ Movable property - 5 years (if the value without VAT exceeds EUR 70,000).

Latvia does not have an adjustment period for services.

9.4 VAT refunds to EU taxable persons

The claim should be filed electronically with the tax authorities of the country where the taxable person is
established.

‘The minimum limit for claims that are made for a calendar year or the remainder of a calendar year is
EUR 50. The minimum interim limit for claims that are made for less than a calendar year but at least 3
months is EUR 400.

The minimum period for claiming a refund is 3 months, except the last months of the calendar year ~ then
claims for a shorter time period are accepted. Maximum period is one calendar year.

The claim should be filed by 30 September of the following year. Claims filed after the deadline are not
accepted. When considering the refund claims, Latvian tax authorities often request invoice copies for the
expenses and additional explanations. Sometimes the authorities request originals. The time limit for a
decision on a refund is 4 months. If additional information is requested, the refund decision is issued within 6
months after filing the claim. If additional information is requested for the second time, the time limit for the
decision is 8 months.

The refunded amounts are transferred within 10 working days but no later than 6 or 8 months after filing

the claim (depending on the number of additional information explanation requests). If the tax authorities”
decision is negative, the appeal should be filed within one month after the receipt of the decision. The date of
sending the decision via electronic systems is considered the date of receipt.

The VAT incurred for the following expenses is not refunded:

+ for tax amounts included in an invoice issued by the taxable person that does not conform with the
requirements set out by the VAT law;

+ for a transaction that has not happened;

+ — for goods or services related to immovable property located in Latvia (unless the received services are
used for transactions where the recipient of the services is liable for payment of the tax);

+ expenses for goods and services received for personal use— catering and use of cars; and

+ expenses incurred by a tour operator acting under the tour operators margin scheme for its services
inchided in a tour package.

Detailed information can be found on the official Latvian tax authorities’ website: https.//tinyurl.com/Swtcdxey

95 VAT refunds to non-EU taxable persons

VAT is only refunded to non-EU taxable persons if a reciprocity agreement exists. Currently, Latvia has
concluded reciprocity agreements with Switzerland, Iceland, Monaco and Norway. Reciprocity agreement
with the UK is in process.

Electronic filing for such an application is not possible, as original supporting docuwsents must be filed to the
Latvian tax authorities.

‘The claim should be filed on paper, in Latvian or English. The applicant should either send the application by
post or file it personally at the following address:

354 | Latvia

--- Page 171 ---
Non-resident Tax Data Credibility Assessment Division Tax Board
State Revenue Service

J Talejas Street,R iga,L V-1978

Latvia

The claim can be signed by the authorized signatories of the taxable person or authorized persons (an original
power of attorney is required).

‘The application form can be downloaded at: hrtps://tinyurl.com/mn7m846n.
‘The minimum limit for claims made for a calendar year or the reminder ofa calendar year is EUR 50.

‘The interim minimum limit for claims made for less than a calendar year but at least 3 months is EUR 400.
‘The maximum period for making a claim is one calendar year.

The minimum period for making a claim is 3 months, except if the claim is made for the last months of the
calendar year — then claims for a shorter time period are accepted.

The deadline for making the claim is 30 September of the following year. Claims filed after the deadline are
not accepted.

The following supporting documents are required:

+ original invoices for which the VAT refund is claimed;

+ original importation documents if the refund is claimed for the import of goods;

* payment documents (bank orders of payment, cash receipts);

* original VAT registration certificate, valid for 12 months from the date of issue; and
+ original power of attorney if the claim is filed by an authorized person.

The tax authorities will decide on the refimd within 4 months. If the tax authorities request additional
information, then the deadline for the decision can be extended up to 8 months. The refund is processed
within 10 working days after the decision is taken but no later than within 4 months from receipt of the claim
(or 8 months if additional information has been requested).

The appeal of the tax authorities’ decision should be filed within one month after the receipt of the decision.

VAT is not refunded for the following expenses:

* for tax amounts indicated in tax invoices which do not satisfy the requirements of VAT law;

«for transactions which did not take place;

+ — for goods or services related to immovable property located in Latvia (unless the received services are
used for transactions where the recipient of the services is liable for payment of the tax);

+ for goods or services received for personal use (car expenses, catering, entertainment); and

+ for goods or services supplied to a tour operator applying the tour operators margin scheme.

10. Administrative obligations

10.1 Invoices

Latvian VAT-registered businesses must supply VAT invoices to VAT-registered customers for all their
taxable supplies (including zero-rated sales, but not exempt sales without input credit) and may incur a fine
if they do not do so when requested by a VAT-registered customer or the SRS. Invoices or other supporting
documentation containing necessary information are required for VAT accounting purposes and to support
input VAT deductions. As an anti-fraud measure, certain types of taxpayers are required to use cash registers.
Taxpayers such as restaurants, shops, etc. who accept cash payments are obliged to use cash registers. The
cash registers must meet certain technical requirements, among other things, to issue VAT invoices. Some
taxpayers (¢.g. private doctors, lawyers, craftsmen) are allowed not to use cash registers, but should issue an
e-receipt.

Latvia 1 355

--- Page 172 ---
There are certain circumstances in which a supplier should not issue a VAT invoice (e.g,, suppliers that are not
registered for VAT or for certain special billing schemes). In addition, invoices do not need to be issued for
supplics made under the One Stop Shop (OSS) unless specifically requested by the customer.

10.1.1 Invoice content

A VAT invoice must contain the following information:

+ date when the invoice was issued;

*« _ sequential numbering of the invoice, which provides a unique identification of the invoice;

* name (natural person - given name, surname, personal identity number) and legal address (natural person
declared place of residence) of the supplier of the goods or the services;

+ VAT registration number of the supplier of the goods or provider of the services;

+ name (natural person - given name, surname, personal identity number) and legal address (natural person
declared place of residence) of the customer;

+ VAT registration number of the customer if the customer is liable for VAT and for intra-Community
supplies;

+ — date of the supply of the goods or date of the provision of the service if such differs from the date of issue
of the invoice, or the date when a payment has been received in advance if such date is known and it
differs from the issue date of the invoice;

+ description, amount (volume) and unit of measurement of the goods supplied or services provided;

+ price (value of one unit without VAT) of the goods supplied or services provided;

+ discounts applied if they are not deducted from the unit price;

+ VAT rate applied;

+ calculated amount of VAT payable;

* the total of the transaction without VAT;

+ incase of self-billing a corresponding reference “pasaprékins” is required;

+ the information necessary to determine whether there is a new means of transport;

+ special wording or reference to the VAT law or the directive, if 0% VAT, reverse charge, or another special
regime applies, for instance:

+ recipient of goods or services — nodoka apgriezta maksa¥ana;

+ special procedure of paying the tax and deduction of input tax is applied (cash accounting} naudas
lidzek{u uzskaite;

+ intra-Community supply — pretu piegiide Eiropas Savieniba;

* export supply - eksports;

+ margin scheme - second-hand goods - pe]gas dalas rezims lietotfim precém;

+ margin scheme - works of art - pelnas dalas reZims makslas darbiem:

+ margin scheme - collector’s items and antiques - pe]yas dalas rezims kolekciju priekSmetiem un
senlietim;

* tour operator margin scheme - pe|nas dalas reZims celojumu agentiram.

+ ifthe authorized representative is responsible for making the tax payment — the registration number of the
representative in the SRS VAT payer register, a name of legal person (name and family name of a natural
person) and legal address (declared residence for a natural person); and

+ if the fiscal agent is responsible for paying the VAT - the registration number of the representative in the
SRS VAT Payer Register or in a taxpayer register of another Member State, a name of legal person (name
and family name of a natural person) and legal address (declared residence for a natural person).

10.1.2 Time limits

For domestic supplies, an invoice should be issued within 15 days after the supply or receipt of the advance
payment. For continuous domestic services, an invoice should be issued at least every 6 months. For EU
supplies of goods and services taxable according to Article 44 of Directive 2006/112/EC, the invoices should
be issued by the 15" day of the month following the supply. For continuous (longer than a year) services
subject to reverse charge according to Article 44 of Directive 2006/112/EC, the service received and VAT
calculated should be reported at least once at the end of each calendar year.

10.1.3 Language

‘There are no official requirements for the language or currency of invoices, however invoices in languages
other than Latvian must be translated on request.

356 | Latvia

--- Page 173 ---
10.1.4 Conversion and exchange rate

Foreign currencies should be converted to Euro using the official exchange rate by the European Central Bank
on the date of the issue of the invoice.

10.1.5  Self— billing

Under Latvian VAT law, self-billing is allowed in case there is an agreement between the two parties (for
instance a contract or written agreement).

10.1.6 Simplified invoice

A registered taxable person is allowed to issue a simplified invoice in the following cases:

* for an inland transaction the value of which excluding tax is less than EUR 150; and

+ in case of amendments made in the initial invoice. In this case the simplified invoice must indicate the
identification number and date of issue of the initial tax invoice, as well as the particular data to be
amended in the additional simplified tax invoice.

A simplified invoice consists of the following information:

+ date of the invoice issuance:

+ the name of the legal person (for natural person — name and surname), address of the supplier of goods or
services, as well as the registration number with the SRS VAT register;

+ the name of the legal person (for a natural person — given name, surname), legal address of the recipient
of goods or services, as well as the registration number with the SRS VAT register or register of taxable
persons of another Member State;

» the name of the goods or the type of the services as well as quantity;

+ the price of goods or services (including tax or excluding tax) and the total amount of the transaction
(including tax or excluding tax); and

* the tax rate and calculated tax amount.

10.1.7 Storage of invoices

Invoices, and other relevant documents for VAT compliance, must be stored for the minimum period of 5
years, unless otherwise stated in the law (i.e. 10 years under OSS schemes).

Invoices must be stored in the same form as they were received or issued i.e. received paper invoices must
be stored in paper form and electronically received ones must be stored in electronic form. For electronic
invoices, the authenticity of origin, integrity of content and readability must be guaranteed during the storage
period.

Original paper invoices must be stored at the premises of the business. Electronic invoices can be stored
elsewhere, even overseas. However, in such cases, the tax authorities must have the right to access those
invoices, and to download them in a usable format, and within a reasonable period of time.

10.1.8 Electronic invoicing

Invoices can be issued electronically and must contain the same information which is required on a paper
invoice. Both parties involyed in the transaction must agree in writing as to the form of an acceptable
electronic signature that will be used to authenticate the invoice (it may be included in the agreement on the
supply of goods and services).

The “Law On Accounting” also provides that the electronic invoice is accepted as a supporting document if
the transaction and the accuracy of the information in the invoice is confirmed by the responsible person of
the recipient of the document (this person should be specially appointed by the management of the recipient
company).

As of 2025 it is mandatory to use e-invoices with public entities. Electronic invoices to public entities can
be transmitted using the PEPPOL network, a third-party invoicing provider, or via the Latvian government’s
eAddress platform. It is envisaged that e-invoicing will be mandatory in domestic B2B transactions as of
2026.

Electronic invoices to other recipients may be transmitted via any practical methods. There are no specific
validation or reporting requirements.

Latvia | 357

--- Page 174 ---
10.2 Compliance

10.2.1 VAT return period

‘The VAT retum reporting period is monthly for all VAT payers newly registered in the VAT register and
remains so at least 6 consecutive months from the VAT registration.

‘The reporting period changes to quarterly if the VAT taxable person does not exceed EUR 50,000 threshold
for VAT taxable transactions, does not perform intra-Community supplies or acquisitions of goods, does not
provide services taxable pursuant to Article 44 of the Directive 2006/112/EC.

If'a taxable person performs EU supplies or acquisitions and has to submit European sales listings, monthly
filing is always required.

VAT returns should be submitted electronically via the Electronic Declaration System (EDS).

10.2.2 Filing of a VAT return and payment

As of 2021, the VAT due is payable by the 23" day of the month following the VAT return period, The VAT
returns are still due on the 20" of the month following the VAT return period. The deadline is transferred to
the next working day, if the due date is during the holidays.

To submit a VAT refund application addressed to another Member State, the Latvian taxpayer must be
registered as an EDS user. In order to fill in the refund application form, the EDS user in the document group
“Outgoing documents for VAT refund in European Union” chooses the document “VAT refund application”
and enters data in accordance with the criteria indicated by the EDS. After filling it in, the document must be
signed in accordance with the general requirements of the EDS.

Please note that the tax authorities only accept returns filed via the EDS.

10.2.3 European sales listing

Registered taxpayers must file an ESL if they engage in any of the following activities:

+ zero-rated intra-Community supplies;

+ transferring goods from the taxpayer’s activity in Latvia to an activity it undertakes in another Member
State;

+ selling services VAT-free to a trader who provided a VAT registration number in another Member State; or

+ supplying goods in connection with call-off stock transactions.

Taxpayers must comply with recapitulative statement reporting obligations in order to obtain a zero rate on
intra-Community dispatches.

The ESL must provide details of each customers’ residence and VAT registration in an EU jurisdiction outside
Latvia, The list must also include the aggregate value in euros, of the supplies made to each customer in the
applicable taxable period.

The ESL must be filed with the SR$’s EDS on Form PVN2 or using the agency’s e-service or file transfer
service, no later than the 20" day of the month after the expiry of the applicable reporting period. An ESL for
services only must be filed quarterly and an ESL for goods, or goods and services, must be filed monthly.
10.2.4 National recapitulative statement

There is a form of national recapitulative statement in Latvia. With the taxable person’s monthly or quarterly
VAT-declaration, an attachment to the declaration (Attachment 2 “PVN 1 - I”) must be filed. It must detail
each purchase and sales transaction over EUR 150.

10.2.5 Tax assessment period
The tax assessment period in Latvia is 3 years following the day the VAT becomes payable.

358 | Latvia

--- Page 175 ---
10.3 Penalties

Various administrative penalties can be applied for failure to comply with reporting, accounting and
administrative requirements. The amounts of the penalties vary depending on the particular violation and the
status of the person who has committed the violation.

Penalties can also be assessed for the underpayment or nonpayment of tax due as well as for obtaining
incorrect refunds of overpaid tax. The penalties range from 20% to 50% of the tax liability assessed, under
Articles 32-34 of the Taxes and Duties Act.

10.3.1 Default penalties for late registration
Ifa natural or legal person, who has registered as a performer of economic activities, performs an economic
activity:
+ without registering as a payer of VAT; or
+ within 30 days after the term determined by the tax administration:
* does not submit the tax declarations provided for by tax laws, and
+ _ also does not submit the business and accounting records requested by the tax administration,

then the tax administration assesses and enforces:

+ the tax for the taxation period from the date on which the person had an obligation to register as a
taxpayer;

+ late payment penalty; and

+ apenalty at 100% of the underpaid tax.

10.3.2 Default penalties for not filing a VAT return or a European sales listing on time
For failing to file a VAT retum or a European sales listing within the required time or with incomplete

documents, a fine of up to EUR 700 can be imposed on individuals and legal persons, depending on the
period of delay. For not filing the required documents at all, a fine of EUR 700 can be imposed.

10.3.3 Default penalties for not paying VAT on time to the tax authorities
If the VAT is not paid on time, penalties in the amount of 20%, 30%, 50% or 100% of the VAT payable
depending on the VAT amount not paid, can be applied, as per Article 32 of the Law on Taxes and Fees. Late
payment penalties of 18.25% per year (0.05% per day) on the VAT amount due also apply for each day of the
delay.

10.3.4 Default penalties on VAT assessments when VAT is not reported correctly

If the VAT is not paid up to the correct amount, the VAT authorities can also impose a penalty of 20%, 30% or
50% of the VAT payable depending on the VAT amount not paid.

10.4 Intrastat

In Latvia, separate monthly Intrastat returns must be submitted to the Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. No
Intrastat return for distance sales should be submitted.

The administrative penalty for not filing the Intrastat reports or missing the filing deadlines might be imposed
- minimum EUR 50, but depending on circumstances up to EUR 10,000 (but please note that it is rarely
exercised).

10.4.1 Intrastat threshold
Tn 2025 the Intrastat threshold for arrivals is EUR 350,000 and for dispatches the threshold is EUR 200,000.

Detailed returns are required if the special thresholds are exceeded: EUR 5,000,000 for arrivals and
EUR 7,000,000 for dispatches.

10.4.2 Intrastat data to be reported
The information which needs to be reported for both the arrival and the dispatch statistics is:
+ 8digit commodity code of the goods;

+ invoice value of the goods in EURs;

+ net weight of the goods;

+ supplementary units;

Latvia | 359

--- Page 176 ---
+ EU Member State of origin/destination;
* nature of the transaction;

+ mode of transport;

+ delivery terms;

+ statistical value;

+ country of origin;

+ VAT ID of partner.

10.5 Additional compliance requirements

There are no additional requirements.

Information received from:
COBALT law office

sabine.vuskane@cobalt.legal
www.cobalt.legal

360 | Latvia
